Call of Duty: Modern Warfare Review
The variety of modes and stellar gunplay make Modern Warfare a great entry in the Call of Duty series.

ADVERTISEMENT
Learn More
Unmute
Ryan McCaffrey
Miranda Sanchez
By Miranda Sanchez, Ryan McCaffrey
Updated: 19 Nov 2019 8:30 pm
Posted: 31 Oct 2019 8:24 pm
For the first time in a few years, it seems like Call of Duty has stopped peeking at other shooters’ homework for inspiration. It’s not to say it hasn’t been successful with taking on trending modes and mechanics, like when Treyarch’s Black Ops 4 ditched the campaign and introduced an amazing battle royale mode. This year, though, Infinity Ward pulls from its own history for Call of Duty: Modern Warfare
SEE DEAL
. And as a result, it’s delivered excellent gunplay to pair with an intense and effective campaign and a fantastic weapon customization system in multiplayer. Something it didn’t learn, though, is that even a great arsenal can’t make up for poor map design, especially when there’s such a limited selection available at launch. Missteps in multiplayer and Spec Ops are like suppression fire that keep Modern Warfare from taking the high ground of its classic namesake, but everything else suggests that the series is now heading in a promising direction.

Every IGN Call of Duty Review




43 IMAGES








We’ve done separate, in-depth reviews for the single-player campaign and multiplayer. Here’s what Ryan McCaffrey said about this year’s Call of Duty campaign in his review:
Call of Duty: Modern Warfare Single-player Campaign Review
“As someone who’s played every single Call of Duty campaign and really missed it last year, the new Modern Warfare is exactly the kind of single-player revival I’ve been looking for. It introduces welcome new kinds of gameplay moments while executing familiar ones exceptionally well. Sure, its story may not be as provocative as it seems to want to be, but it reestablishes a strong identity for this 16-year-old franchise with a showcase solo shooter experience. Amidst a growing pile of battle royales and looter shooters that just don’t scratch that same itchy trigger finger, it felt just like old times.”

Score: 8.2
Ranking Every Call of Duty Single-Player Campaign




15 IMAGES








You can read Ryan’s full review of the campaign here.
Call of Duty: Modern Warfare Multiplayer Review
“Call of Duty: Modern Warfare’s scaled-up version of Ground War is a chaotic good time, and Realism quiets things down a bit to present a uniquely delightful challenge. The rest of Modern Warfare's multiplayer ranges from great additions like Gunfight and its in-depth weapon customization, to mediocre with modes like Spec Ops. Across most of them, unfortunately, mediocre maps make spawn camping a frustrating problem and escaping the ones where you know you'll have a bad time is more challenging with removed map voting. But there sure is a lot to do in Modern Warfare, and that variety is important to keep things feeling fresh after the occasional unexpected low points.”

Score: 7.5
Share
Autoplay setting: On
Read more about my thoughts on Modern Warfare’s multiplayer here or in the video review above.
Verdict
Overall, the campaign is Call of Duty: Modern Warfare’s strength. Its well-designed missions make for excellent weapon testing grounds and feature a slew of interesting mechanics that wouldn’t work anywhere else. Some of its best parts come about because of the secretive nature of this war, and that includes some heavy moments that are generally done well. The multiplayer, meanwhile, maintains its smooth gunplay and has great weapon customization to go with it, but those don't matter when having to play on this disappointing batch of launch maps. Still, Modern Warfare’s gorgeous new Realism mode, the large-scale Ground War, and quick and dirty Gunfight help mix things up for a good time.