Skip to main content
Penn State mark for print
Search Penn State
Search Penn State
For the Media
Contact Us
Stay Connected
News by audience:
STUDENTS
BUSINESS & INDUSTRY
ALUMNI
VISITORS & NEIGHBORS
FACULTY & STAFF
CAMPUSESCOLLEGES
Saturday, November 30, 2019
Penn State News
News Main Menu
HOME
RESEARCH
ACADEMICS
IMPACT
CAMPUS LIFE
ATHLETICS
ADMINISTRATION
ARTS AND ENTERTAINMENT
Probing Question: How do microwaves cook food?
7522
Tom Fitzgerald
November 28, 2005
Think about it—most of us don't go through an entire day without using a microwave oven. But how does it work? What actually happens when you "nuke" yesterday's pizza or pop a bag of popcorn in the microwave? And does the term "nuking" mean there's really radiation inside that box?

"Although technically microwaves are a kind of electromagnetic radiation, we shouldn't use the word 'radiation' to describe them—it scares a lot of people unnecessarily," says Swamy Anantheswaran, Penn State professor of food science. "Actually, microwave ovens operate in the electromagnetic spectrum at about the same frequency as a lot of telephones—2450 megahertz," he adds. "But they have more power output as compared to cell phones. That's why the FCC tightly regulates their manufacture. They want to make sure they're built well enough to contain all of the radio emissions."

microwave
Emily Wiley
So, microwaves are just high-frequency electromagnetic waves, and your microwave oven creates a high-intensity electromagnetic field to cook your food. But what are those waves really doing in there?

Microwaves do most of their work on the water in food, Anantheswaran says. "Water molecules constitute what are known as 'dipoles," he explains. "A dipole is sort of like a bar magnet, with a positive pole and a negative pole. The oven's electromagnetic field oscillates as it passes through the water molecules in the food, changing the polarity of the field and causing the dipole/water molecules to flip themselves in order to be aligned with the new polarity." Heat is created by the resulting friction of the water molecules reversing direction millions of times a second.

Conventional ovens rely on conduction to slowly spread the heat from the outside of the food to the inside; by the time the inside is cooked, the outside may be over-cooked. In microwave cooking, the energy reaches everywhere almost at once, resulting in more-or-less even heating. "It's like each water molecule is a little heater heating the food," Anantheswaran says.

While protein, fat, and starch molecules also absorb microwave energy to a lesser degree, the presence of salt in foods can have a large influence on microwave heating. "Salt molecules tend to break apart in the presence of water," notes Anantheswaran. The sodium and chlorine ions create heat by colliding in the rapidly oscillating electromagnetic field, leaving less microwave energy available to heat the center of the food.

"When you place a refrigerated bowl of soup in the microwave," he explains, "the soup near the outside encounters the microwave energy first and very rapidly heats. It even appears to be boiling. So you take the soup out—but then discover the central portion is still cold".

"This is because the salt ions absorb so much energy around the outside of the bowl that they produce localized boiling before the rest of the soup absorbs enough energy."

Microwave ovens can be great time-savers, Anantheswaran says. "Total cooking time can be much less, allowing for greater retention of nutrients. However, most consumers manage to overcook their food by leaving it in the microwave too long or by using too high of a power setting."

The solution is simple, he says, and as important for safety as for good eating.

"Use the appropriate power setting for the food you're microwaving," reminds Anantheswaran, "and make sure you read the manual!"

Ramaswamy C. Anantheswaran, Ph.D., is professor of food science and graduate program coordinator. He can be reached at rca3@psu.edu.

SHARE THIS STORY

Last Updated November 28, 2005
RELATED CONTENT
No More Mushy Mushrooms

Ceramic material revs up microwaving

Microwave your foods safely

TOPICSResearch, Science and Technology
TAGSfood science, microwave, Probing Question, Ramaswamy Anantheswaran
NEWS BY AUDIENCE:
Students
Business & Industry
Alumni
Visitors & Neighbors
Faculty & Staff
NEWS BY TOPIC:
Research
Academics
Global
Campus Life
Athletics
Administration
Arts and Entertainment
NEWS BY CAMPUS:
Abington
Altoona
Beaver
Behrend
Berks
Brandywine
Carlisle
DuBois
Fayette
Great Valley
Greater Allegheny
Harrisburg
Hazleton
Hershey
Lehigh Valley
Mont Alto
New Kensington
Penn College
Schuylkill
Scranton
Shenango
University Park
Wilkes-Barre
World Campus
York

NEWS BY COLLEGE:
Agricultural Sciences
Arts and Architecture
Bellisario College of Communications
Dickinson Law
Earth and Mineral Sciences
Eberly College of Science
Education
Engineering
Health and Human Development
Information Sciences and Technology
Liberal Arts
Medicine
Nursing
Penn State Law
Schreyer Honors College
Smeal College of Business

STAY CONNECTED:
Email / Headlines
Emergency Notifications / PSUAlert
RSS Feeds
For the Media
Photo Galleries
Videos
SOCIAL MEDIA:
Facebook
Twitter
YouTube
Flickr
LinkedIn
Instagram
Pinterest
Penn State
Contact Us
Search
312 Old Main, University Park, Pennsylvania 16802814-865-7517
Privacy
Non-discrimination
Equal Opportunity
Accessibility
Copyright
The Pennsylvania State University © 2019