Chloe Newton's ePortfolio
… A reflection on my experiences as I begin my Primary Teaching journey.
Skip to content
HOME MY LEARNING JOURNEY
STANDARD FOR PROVISIONAL REGISTRATION
 
ONLINE MATHS ASSESSMENT
 
ONLINE LANGUAGE ASSESSMENT
 PERSONAL AUDIT & TRANSFERABLE SKILLS PLACEMENT GOALS
MA1 PLACEMENT
 
MA3 PLACEMENT
 
MA4 PLACEMENT
 GRADE SCORES & PROGRESSION
What do you mean numbers don’t exist?!
1 Reply
Yes, you did see it right. Apparently, numbers do not exist. My mind is still trying to process how such a concept could even be possible after believing all my life that numbers are the fundamental basis of mathematics. After much time pondering and challenging this, it appears to be true…

We use numbers everyday, from the numerals on our watches, the numbers on our calendars to the sizing on our clothing. Each of these numbers we use represent something, but what if we substituted our common base-ten numbers for something different? Would we still be able to count, tell the time, use money etc?

Collins (1998) suggests that by taking a nominal view of numbers, we can. He suggests that we can use any number system in the world (or a completely new one if we wished) to represent a size and it would still make sense, as long as we knew what each symbol represented. Society has constructed these notions that 1 is less than 4, and 4 is 3 more than 1 etc. However, Collins (1998) argues that we could equally use the symbol ‘4’ to represent one item and the symbol ‘1’ to represent four items, thus showing the flexibility of numbers as we know it. This is something I would never have considered as I thought the number system was a rigid structure, something which could never be changed. Nominalists see numbers as ‘fictions’ – symbols which aid and support our understanding of mathematics and everyday life, meaning we could use other symbols or entities to do the exact same job. The fact that we use different number systems around the world, such as octal, mayan and Arabic, supports this theory, and suggests that numbers are something which we have been predisposed to use through the work of many mathematicians which have came before us.



On the other hand, Collins (1998) explores the view that many realists take. We use numbers everyday in order to make sense of, and complete a wide variety of tasks everyday and thus, numbers must be real if we use them. Fine (2009) suggests the links that we have formed between numbers and the properties we have given them suggests that their existence must be true. For example, we have developed the concept of ‘prime’ numbers within our number system. Although, is this not another made up concept used to help us understand and make links within our made up number system? Confusing, isn’t it!

We could have used the word prime to represent another property of numbers, such as those divisible by 2, or every number ending in 1. Thus, this could be applied to other items we represent using language in our everyday lives. We could use the word ‘table’ to represent a ‘chair’ or vice versa, as long as we had an agreed understanding as a society that a ‘table’ actually represented what we know today to be chair.

Randy Palisoc develops this idea is his ted talk (see video below) by suggesting that numbers are a language we use to make sense of the world around us (TEDx Talks, 2014), just like we have constructed the letter system (the alphabet) and thus words to be able to communicate with one another.



Overall, I believe that the debate on the existence of numbers is an incredibly interesting one. I acknowledge that we use numbers everyday to perform basic functions, and thus they must be real as such. I also share Collin’s (1998) nominalist view that we could substitute other symbols for our base-ten number system and would still be able to perform basic arithmetic and daily tasks involving what our numbers represent, whether that be time, quantity of money or clothes sizes – the list goes on. The language we use for numbers, whatever this may be, is one which we will most likely always require to be a fully functioning member of society. Through this, is it clear to see that is imperative that we have a number system in place which allows us to represent different quantities and sizes etc, even if it is made up!

References

Collins, A.W. (1998) On the Question ‘Do Numbers Exist?’, The Philosophical Quarterly, 48 (190), pp. 23-36. Available at: https://www.jstor.org/stable/2660370?seq=1#page_scan_tab_contents [Accessed 8 October 2018].

Fine, K (2009) The question of ontology, Metametaphysics: New Essays on the Foundations of Ontology, pp. 157-177. Available at: https://philpapers.org/rec/FINTQO-2 [Accessed 8 October 2018].

Image – Wikipedia (2018) Numeral Systems of the World. Available at: https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Numeral_Systems_of_the_World.svg [Accessed 8 October 2018].

Video – TEDx Talks (2014) Math isn’t hard, it’s a language | Randy Palisoc | TEDxManhattanBeach. Available at: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=V6yixyiJcos [Accessed 8 October 2018].

 

 

Share this:
Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)Click to share on Pinterest (Opens in new window)Click to share on WhatsApp (Opens in new window)
This entry was posted in 2.1 Curriculum, 3.1 Teaching & Learning, Discovering Maths, UoDEdushare on October 8, 2018.
Post navigation← Maths IS important!Space is big, really REALLY big →
1 thought on “What do you mean numbers don’t exist?!”

Jonathan Brown
October 18, 2018 at 2:12 pm
Chloe, as a philosophy graduate I really enjoyed this post! You might be interested to do a little research into Plato and his theory of ‘forms’ and the Platonic Cave. It might help you further explore some of these ideas.

Reply ↓
Leave a Reply
Your email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *

Comment

Name *

Email *

Website



READ IN YOUR OWN LANGUAGE

Powered by Google TranslateTranslate
CATEGORIES
1 Prof. Values & Personal Commitment
1.1 Social Justice
1.3 Trust & Respect
1.4 Prof. Commitment
2 Prof. Knowledge & Understanding
2.1 Curriculum
2.2 Education Systems & Prof. Responsibilities
2.3 Pedagogical Theories & Practice
3. Prof. Skills & Abilities
3.1 Teaching & Learning
3.4 Prof. Reflection & Commitment
Contemporary issues
Discovering Maths
SPR Attainment
UoDEdushare
RECENT POSTS
The Beauty of Mathematics
Space is big, really REALLY big
What do you mean numbers don’t exist?!
Maths IS important!
Maths can be… creative?
RECENT COMMENTS
Jonathan Brown on What do you mean numbers don’t exist?!
Jonathan Brown on Maths can be… creative?
BOOKMARKS
Becca Potter
Danielle Park
Eilidh Purdie
Hannah Robertson
Hazel Neill
Kara Robertson
Katie Henderson
Lucy Somerville
Robyn Risbridger
Susannah Robertson
ARCHIVES
November 2018
October 2018
September 2018
February 2018
January 2018
November 2017
September 2017
META
Log in
Entries RSS
Comments RSS
WordPress.org
Proudly powered by WordPress
Report a Glow concern  Cookie policy  Privacy policy

Glow Blogs uses cookies to enhance your experience on our service. By using this service or closing this message you consent to our use of those cookies. Please read our Cookie Policy. OK