
Search on Information Security…
Log in Sign up
By using our site, you acknowledge that you have read and understand our Cookie Policy, Privacy Policy, and our Terms of Service.

Information Security
Home
Questions
Tags
Users
Unanswered
How stack smashing is prevented?
Ask Question
Asked 6 years, 2 months ago
Active 4 years, 11 months ago
Viewed 2k times


7


2
I just read AlephOne's paper on smashing the stack, and implemented it on my machine (Ubuntu 12.04), it was a bit old so had to take a lot of help from the internet but I enjoyed it.

Now, I want to learn how is that prevented in real life.

It would be great if you can suggest me some papers or online resources that demonstrate how it is prevented.

attacks exploit known-vulnerabilities buffer-overflow
shareimprove this question
edited Dec 16 '13 at 13:48
user10211
asked Sep 8 '13 at 12:21

Jaydeep Solanki
22744 silver badges99 bronze badges
add a comment
2 Answers
activeoldestvotes

12

There are two primary techniques for mitigating stack based buffer overflows.

The first technique is attacking the problem at the roots. Buffer overflows occur when a program tries to write outside the bounds of a data structure. The most effective way to stop a buffer overflow is to stop this from occurring. Use a programming language, be it Java, Python, Ruby, that will manage the memory for you. If you must use C, ensure that you perform proper checks before writing to a buffer.

The second technique involves mitigating the damage a buffer overflow can cause. Techniques like stack canaries, DEP and ASLR fall under this category. They work to limit the damage a buffer overflow can cause by making it more difficult for an attacker to execute arbitrary code after an overflow. Such techniques can be defeated. For more information about DEP and ASLR, see this question.

shareimprove this answer
edited Mar 17 '17 at 13:14

Community♦
1
answered Sep 8 '13 at 12:46
user10211
add a comment


4

Just a small note:

Since, you were using Ubuntu 12.04 for the testing, you must have given your system a command (assuming that you took a lot of help from the internet and this was the first time your were trying to smash the stack):

echo 0 > /proc/sys/kernel/randomize_va_space
Or some related command. This command basically disables the ASLR (mentioned by Terry) on the system. By default, ASLR is an enabled feature on the kernel versions 2.6 and above.

(Actually wanted to post this as a comment, but was not able to do so because of Reputation issues :))

shareimprove this answer
edited Oct 20 '14 at 4:03
answered Oct 2 '13 at 3:09

Rahil Arora
4,01322 gold badges1818 silver badges3939 bronze badges
add a comment
Your Answer
Sign up or log in
 Sign up using Google
 Sign up using Facebook
 Sign up using Email and Password
Post as a guest
Name
Email
Required, but never shown

Post Your Answer
By clicking “Post Your Answer”, you agree to our terms of service, privacy policy and cookie policy

Not the answer you're looking for? Browse other questions tagged attacks exploit known-vulnerabilities buffer-overflow or ask your own question.
Blog
Copying code from Stack Overflow? You might paste security vulnerabilities, too
Featured on Meta
Feedback post: Moderator review and reinstatement processes

Linked
110
How do ASLR and DEP work?
Related
85
Stack Overflows - Defeating Canaries, ASLR, DEP, NX
3
Stack smashing keep getting segmentation fault
5
Smashing the stack if it grows upwards
5
NX bit: does it protect the stack?
0
Fomat String vulnerability used to display data outside the function stack frame?
0
8 extra bytes in stack
3
How to overwrite ebp on stack alignment?
0
Offset in Stack
2
Can stack overflow be prevented by pushing return address first?
Hot Network Questions
Does driving a speaker with a DC offset AC signal matter?
Writing style in academic English
Find the length of a number's "base-jumping" path
Stack Exchange Answerer
Why is this negated with nicht and not kein?
Is Purusha (mentioned in Purusha suktam) same as Brahman (Parabrahman)?
How are names of enharmonic notes determined?
Germany's Ladenschlussgesetz in comparison to a debatable law in Israel
Will transcribing music improve my ability to play a song by ear?
If thermodynamics says entropy always increases, how can the universe end in heat death?
Can Alice win the game?
Why is/was the National Liberal Party of Romania opposed to Catholic & Hungarian school when they support a German-minority president?
Is it acceptable to say that a divergent series that tends to infinity is 'equal to' infinity?
How to compare the signature of two functions?
What are the advantages of taking "Sculptor of Flesh" eldritch invocation over taking Polymorph as a spell?
Fingering for Bach's Toccata in E-minor BWV914
Dice game with rules and three dice
Is Communism intrinsically Authoritarian?
more hot questions
 Question feed

INFORMATION SECURITY
Tour
Help
Chat
Contact
Feedback
Mobile
Disable Responsiveness
COMPANY
Stack Overflow
Stack Overflow Business
Developer Jobs
About
Press
Legal
Privacy Policy
STACK EXCHANGE
NETWORK
Technology
Life / Arts
Culture / Recreation
Science
Other
Blog
Facebook
Twitter
LinkedIn
site design / logo © 2019 Stack Exchange Inc; user contributions licensed under cc by-sa 4.0 with attribution required. rev 2019.11.29.35523

 