
   
SEARCH
IT Policy Downloads 5G Developer Top DaaS providers Security More 
Newsletters Forums Resource Library TR Premium
 
Basics of stack-smashing attacks and defenses against them


by Chad Perrin in IT Security, in Tech & Work  on November 30, 2009, 10:58 PM PST
Understanding the basics of stack-smashing attacks can teach admins what OSes are best protected against them and developers how to protect their programs from stack buffer overflow vulnerabilities.

A memory structure used in many programming languages to store state -- variable values, for instance -- is known as the "stack." The most well-known languages to rely heavily on the stack are probably C and C++. Forth is a language that has gained some fame specifically for its focus on stack-based programming. Program control flow is also managed by the stack.

Variables whose memory is allocated on the stack need to be carefully managed so that data stored in them will not exceed the stack space that has been allocated. If it does, that additional data can overwrite other data stored on the stack and cause problems for other variables and program control flow.

If a malicious security cracker is able to intentionally exceed the stack space allocated to a variable, he or she can use malformed data to actually affect program control flow in a deliberate way. This sort of security compromise is known as a "stack-smashing attack" and, depending on the software whose vulnerability to the attack is exploited and that program's execution environment, might even lead to a root compromise of the OS itself.

Memory management vulnerabilities such as stack-smashing attacks are extremely dangerous. The stack-smashing attack is in fact a type of buffer overflow attack, and may sometimes be called a stack buffer overflow attack. Many vulnerabilities can only affect the specific parts of the system the vulnerable software was meant to affect, but memory management vulnerabilities can often "break out" of the intended limits on the software to affect other parts of the system, turning an apparently innocuous piece of software into a terrible threat to the rest of the operating environment.


Server Monitoring

Stay on top of server outages and performance issues with our server monitoring tool built for cloud-scale. Monitor your entire server infrastructure and get in-depth visibility into key performance indicators of your data center's Windows & Linux...

Downloads provided by ManageEngine
A number of software solutions meant to protect against, or detect, stack-smashing vulnerabilities are available. Among the ways to protect your system against stack-smashing attacks are non-executable stacks and stack canaries. Each of these includes several subtypes.

Non-Executable Stack: Both hardware- and software-based non-executable stack protections exist. They work by differentiating between executable stacks and non-executable stacks, so that data not intended to be executed can be stored in non-executable stack. Then, if a malicious security cracker (or a bug in your program) overwrites the end of a variable, the operating system at least won't try to execute the malformed data. A number of operating systems implement variations on non-executable stack management, including FreeBSD PG_NX, Microsoft Windows Data Execution Prevention (not the same thing as "Software DEP"), OpenBSD W^X, and Red Hat Linux Exec Shield.
Stack Canaries: Stack canaries include random canaries, random XOR canaries, and terminator canaries. In essence, a canary is a designated piece of data used to validate stored data so that, when malformed data appears, the difference can be identified and hopefully an attempted vulnerability exploit can be defanged. In theory, this requires a would-be attacker to access the stack indirectly to avoid overwriting the "canary", though implementations may vary in their effectiveness.
ADVERTISING

An entire book could be written about this subject. Further investigation of this topic is left as an exercise for the reader.

WHITE PAPERS, WEBCASTS, AND DOWNLOADS
 
8x8's Enterprise Engagement Management Platform: Moving Toward an Integrated Approach
White Papers from 8x8, Inc.

 
Free 30-day trial of Watson Studio Desktop and IBM SPSS Modeler
Resource Center from IBM

 
Tech Pro Research: IT Budget Research Report 2019
Research from TechRepublic Premium

 
Scaling data science: How best-in-class companies innovate with machine learning
White Papers from IBM

 
ESG Technical Validation on IBM Watson Studio and Watson Machine Learning
White Papers from IBM



EDITOR'S PICKS

Transgender employees in tech: Why this "progressive" industry has more work to do

Python is eating the world: How one developer's side project became the hottest programming language on the planet

How iRobot used data science, cloud, and DevOps to design its next-gen smart home robots

Beyond the PC: Lenovo's ambitious plan for the future of computing

Straight up: How the Kentucky bourbon industry is going high tech

Inside the Raspberry Pi: The story of the $35 computer that changed the world
Comment and share: Basics of stack-smashing attacks and defenses against them

By Chad Perrin
Chad Perrin is an IT consultant, developer, and freelance professional writer. He holds both Microsoft and CompTIA certifications and is a graduate of two IT industry trade schools.

 | Full Bio | See all of Chad's content
TECH & WORK TECH INDUSTRY CXO SMBS INNOVATION DEVELOPER TECH & WORK ON ZDNET 
by TaboolaPromoted Links
Recommended
The 21 Hottest Gifts Of 2019
ZangDeal
Wells Fargo $400 Welcome Bonus Offer. Learn More
Wells Fargo - Member FDIC
You Should Never Shop on Amazon Without Using This Trick – Here’s Why
Honey
Intel officially unveils Chaco Canyon, first fanless NUC in five years
10 ways to spot top technology talent during the interview process
The best Black Friday 2019 deals on smartphones

EDITOR'S PICKS

Transgender employees in tech: Why this "progressive" industry has more work to do

Python is eating the world: How one developer's side project became the hottest programming language on the planet

How iRobot used data science, cloud, and DevOps to design its next-gen smart home robots

Beyond the PC: Lenovo's ambitious plan for the future of computing

WHITE PAPERS, WEBCASTS, AND DOWNLOADS
Product Tour of IBM Watson Machine Learning with Watson Studio
Training From IBM

How to Solve the Enterprise Communications Crisis with an Open Cloud Strate...
White Papers From 8x8, Inc.

Tech Pro Research: Using Tech to Make Shopping Easier and More Enjoyable
Downloads From TechRepublic.com

Digital Transformation ebook: Guide to becoming a digital transformation ch...
Downloads From TechRepublic Premium

Special report: Blockchain in business: Where are we now, and predictions for the next decade
Microsoft Ignite 2019: Azure Arc, HoloLens 2, Edge, Quantum and Teams
Year-round IT budget template
Digital Transformation ebook: Guide to becoming a digital transformation champion
SERVICES
About Us
Membership
Newsletters
RSS Feeds
Site Map
Site Help & Feedback
FAQ
Advertise
Reprint Policy
TR Premium Terms of Service
EXPLORE
Blogs
Downloads
TechRepublic Forums
Meet the Team
TechRepublic Academy
TechRepublic Premium
Resource Library
Photos
Videos
    
© 2019 CBS Interactive. All rights reserved. Privacy Policy | Cookies | Ad Choice | Terms of Use | Mobile User Agreement
A ZDNet site | Visit other CBS Interactive sites: 