800.223.2273 MyChart Need help? From out of town? Giving Careers SEARCH
Cleveland Clinic logo
Find a Doctor Locations & Directions Patients & Visitors Health Library Institutes & Departments
Home / Health Library / Symptoms

Wrist Pain: Possible Causes
APPOINTMENTS & ACCESS
CONTACT US
Overview Possible Causes Care and Treatment
How does arthritis cause wrist pain?
Arthritis is a disease that causes swelling, stiffness, and pain in a joint. These symptoms, which can affect the wrist, are often called “inflammation.”

The different kinds of arthritis include the following:

Osteoarthritis is the most common kind of arthritis, and is caused by wear and tear. (It is also called degenerative arthritis.) Osteoarthritis is most common in older people, but it also runs in families, and people who inherit it might get it at a younger age. Injuries to the wrist, being overweight, and jobs or sports in which you use your wrist more often can also lead to osteoarthritis. If you live into your 70s, you will probably have symptoms of osteoarthritis.
Rheumatoid arthritis is a disease of the immune system that can affect many joints, and often begins in the hands and wrists. It usually starts at a younger age than osteoarthritis and is more common in women. The cause of rheumatoid arthritis is thought to be autoimmune (the immune system attacks the body).
Gout is a kind of arthritis that occurs when your body produces too much uric acid, a natural chemical. Uric acid can also be produced by food and drink, including red meat and beer. Gout is more common in the knees, ankles and toes, but it can affect wrists, too.
How does carpal tunnel syndrome cause wrist pain?
Carpal tunnel syndrome occurs when there is too much pressure on the median nerve that controls feeling for parts of your hand. That nerve, and nine tendons that are responsible for bending your fingers and thumb, run from the wrist into the hand through a narrow opening called the carpal tunnel.

Some people are born with an unusually narrow carpal tunnel. Other causes include swelling caused by injury, and repetitive hand and wrist actions (sometimes job-related) that irritate the tendons and cause them to swell, making less room for the nerve.

Previous: OverviewNext: Care and Treatment
SHARE  Facebook Twitter LinkedIn EmailPrint
Last reviewed by a Cleveland Clinic medical professional on 11/07/2017.

References
Get useful, helpful and relevant health + wellness information
Health Essentials logo stacked.
ENEWS
Get useful, helpful and relevant health + wellness information
Enter your email
SIGN UP!
Related Institutes & Services
Orthopaedic & Rheumatologic Institute
Cleveland Clinic offers expert diagnosis, treatment and rehabilitation for bone, joint or connective tissue disorders and rheumatic and immunologic diseases.
Medicine Institute
The Medicine Institute puts patients first with comprehensive, coordinated, personal healthcare.

Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services. Policy

More health news + advice
Loading...
SHOW MORE
APPOINTMENTS & ACCESS
CONTACT US
Facebook Twitter YouTube Instagram LinkedIn Pinterest Snapchat
Actions
Appointments & Access
Pay Your Bill
Financial Assistance
Accepted Insurance
Make a Donation
Refer a Patient
Phone Directory
Events Calendar
Blog, News & Mobile Apps
Consult QD
Health Essentials
Newsroom
Mobile Apps
About Cleveland Clinic
About Us
Locations
Quality & Patient Safety
Office of Diversity & Inclusion
Patient Experience
Research & Innovations
Community Commitment
Careers
For Employees
Resources for Medical Professionals
Site Information & Policies
Send Us Feedback
Site Map
About this Website
Copyright, Reprint & Licensing
Website Terms of Use
Privacy Policy
Notice of Privacy Practices
Non-Discrimination Notice
9500 Euclid Avenue, Cleveland, Ohio 44195 | 800.223.2273 | © 2019 Cleveland Clinic. All Rights Reserved.