

SUBSCRIBE

Possible Causes of Wrist Pain and Treatment Tips
Causes
What to look for
Diagnosis
Treatment
Prevention
Exercises
If you buy something through a link on this page, we may earn a small commission. How this works.
Overview
Wrist pain is any discomfort in the wrist. It’s often caused by carpal tunnel syndrome. Other common causes include wrist injury, arthritis, and gout.

Causes of wrist pain
The following conditions are common causes of wrist pain.

Carpal tunnel syndrome
The median nerve is one of the three major nerves in the forearm. Carpal tunnel syndrome occurs when the median nerve becomes compressed, or pinched. It is located on the palm side of your hand, providing sensation to the following parts of the hand:

thumb
index finger
middle finger
part of the ring finger
It also provides the electrical impulse to the muscle leading to the thumb. Carpal tunnel syndrome can occur in one or both of your hands.

Swelling in the wrist causes the compression in carpal tunnel syndrome. The pain is due to excess pressure in your wrist and on the median nerve.

Aside from causing wrist pain, carpal tunnel syndrome can lead to numbness, weakness, and tingling on the side of your hand near the thumb.

Wrist swelling can occur and trigger carpal tunnel syndrome due to any of the following conditions:

performing repetitive tasks with your hands, such as typing, drawing, or sewing
being overweight, pregnant, or going through menopause
having certain medical conditions, such as diabetes, arthritis, or an underactive thyroid
Wrist injury
An injury to your wrist can also cause pain. Wrist injuries include sprains, broken bones, and tendonitis.

Swelling, bruising, or disfigured joints near the wrist may be symptoms of a wrist injury. Some wrist injuries can happen right away due to the trauma of an impact. Others may develop slowly over time.

Gout
Gout is caused by a buildup of uric acid. Uric acid is a chemical produced when your body breaks down foods that contain organic compounds called purines.

Most uric acid is dissolved in the blood and removed from the body through urination. In some cases, however, the body produces too much uric acid.

The excess uric acid can be deposited in the joints, resulting in pain and swelling. This pain frequently occurs in the knees, ankles, wrists, and feet.

Common causes of gout include:

drinking too much alcohol
overeating
certain medications, such as diuretics
other conditions, such as high blood pressure, diabetes, and kidney disease
Arthritis
Arthritis is an inflammation of the joints. The condition can cause swelling and stiffness in the affected body part. Arthritis has many causes, including normal wear and tear, aging, and overworking the hands.

There are many forms of arthritis, but the most common types include:

Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is an autoimmune disease that usually affects both wrists. It develops when the immune system mistakenly attacks the lining of your joints, including your wrists. This can cause painful swelling, which may eventually result in bone erosion.
Osteoarthritis (OA) is a degenerative joint disease that’s common among older adults. It is caused by a breakdown of the cartilage that covers the joints. The protective tissue is damaged by age and repeated motion. This increases the friction as the bones of the joint rub against each other, resulting in swelling and pain.
Psoriatic arthritis (PsA) is a type of arthritis that occurs in people with a skin disorder called psoriasis.
Symptoms that may occur along with wrist pain
Wrist pain may be accompanied by the following symptoms:

swollen fingers
difficulty making a fist or gripping objects
numbness or tingling sensation in the hands
pain, numbness, or tingling that gets worse at night
sudden, sharp pain in the hand
swelling or redness around the wrist
warmth in a joint near the wrist
Call your doctor immediately if your wrist is warm and red and if you have a fever over 100°F (37.8°C).

These symptoms could signal infectious (septic) arthritis, which is a serious illness. You should also contact your doctor right away if you can’t move your wrist or if your hand looks abnormal. You may have broken a bone.

Your doctor should also evaluate wrist pain that becomes worse or interferes with your ability to do daily tasks.


Diagnosing the cause of wrist pain
Your doctor will perform a physical examination and order certain tests to diagnose the cause of your wrist pain. Your doctor may do the following:

bend your wrist forward for 60 seconds to see if numbness or tingling develops
tap the area over the median nerve to see if pain occurs
ask you to hold objects to test your grip
order X-rays of your wrist to evaluate the bones and joints
order an electromyography to assess the health of your nerves
request a nerve conduction velocity test to check for nerve damage
order urine and blood tests to detect any underlying medical conditions
request a small sample of fluid be taken from your joints to check for crystals or calcium
powered by Rubicon Project
Treatments for wrist pain
Treatment options for wrist pain can vary depending on the cause.

Treatment for carpal tunnel syndrome may include:

wearing a wrist brace or splint to reduce swelling and ease wrist pain
applying hot or cold compresses for 10 to 20 minutes at a time
taking anti-inflammatory or pain-reliving medications, such as ibuprofen or naproxen
having surgery to repair the median nerve, in severe cases
Treatment for gout may consist of:

taking an anti-inflammatory medication, such as ibuprofen or naproxen
drinking lots of water to reduce the concentration of uric acid
cutting back on high-fat foods and alcohol
taking medication your doctor prescribes to decrease the uric acid in your circulatory system
If you have sustained a wrist injury, you can help promote healing by:

wearing a wrist splint
resting your wrist and keeping it elevated
taking a mild pain reliever, such as ibuprofen or acetaminophen
placing an ice pack on the affected area for several minutes at a time to reduce the swelling and pain
If you have arthritis, consider visiting a physical therapist. A physical therapist can show you how to do strengthening and stretching exercises that can help your wrist.

Preventing wrist pain
You can help prevent wrist pain due to carpal tunnel syndrome by practicing some of the following strategies:

using an ergonomic keyboard to keep your wrists from bending upward
resting your hands often while typing or doing similar activities
working with an occupational therapist to stretch and strengthen your wrists
To help prevent future episodes of gout, consider:

drinking more water and less alcohol
avoiding eating liver, anchovies, and smoked or pickled fish
eating only moderate amounts of protein
taking medication as your doctor prescribed
Exercises to help aching wrists
You can also do simple wrist exercises at home to help aching wrists that may include:

Wrist flexes and extensions
This exercise involves placing your forearm on a table, with a cloth padding under your wrist. Turn your arm so your hand is facedown. Move your hand up until you feel a gentle stretch. Return it to its original position and repeat.

Wrist supination and pronation
Stand with your arm out to the side and your elbow bent at 90 degrees. Rotate your forearm so your hand faces up and then turn it the other way, so your hand is facing down.

Wrist deviation
Place your forearm on a table, with your hand hanging off and padding under your wrist. Have your thumb facing up. Move your hand up and down, as if you’re waving.

HEALTHLINE NEWSLETTER
Get our twice weekly wellness email
To inspire you to exercise and eat well, we’ll send you our top health tips and stories, plus must-read news.

Enter your email
Your privacy is important to us

 5 sourcescollapsed






Medically reviewed by William Morrison, MD on April 26, 2019 — Written by Natalie Phillips and Ana Gotter

related stories
What’s Causing My Hand Pain?
Ulnar Tunnel Syndrome
Do Magnetic Bracelets Really Help with Pain?
Understanding TFCC Tears
What Is Forearm Tendonitis, and How’s It Treated?

10 Exercises to Tone Every Inch of Your Body

For a Longer Life and Happier Gut, Eat More Fiber

How Collagen Can Boost Your Body’s Skin, Muscle, and Gut

6 Ways to Boost Your Coffee with Vitamins and Antioxidants
The 3-Day Fix for Energy
Was this article helpful?
Yes
No

READ THIS NEXT
What’s Causing My Hand Pain?
Medically reviewed by William Morrison, MD
There are many different causes and types of hand pain. Here are 10 possible causes of your discomfort, with information on how to get relief.

READ MORE
Ulnar Tunnel Syndrome
Medically reviewed by William Morrison, MD
Stress on the ulnar nerve, which runs from the neck to the hand, can lead to ulnar tunnel syndrome. Here are treatment options and ways to reduce your…

READ MORE
Do Magnetic Bracelets Really Help with Pain?
Medically reviewed by Deborah Weatherspoon, PhD, RN, CRNA
Popular even in Cleopatra's time, but still a hotly debated topic today, magnetic bracelets are used by many to treat arthritis pain. Do they really…

READ MORE
Understanding TFCC Tears
Medically reviewed by William Morrison, MD
TFCC tears are a common wrist injury that can make daily tasks difficult. Learn more about how to treat them and the recovery time involved.

READ MORE
What Is Forearm Tendonitis, and How’s It Treated?
Medically reviewed by William Morrison, MD
Forearm tendonitis is inflammation of the tendons of the forearm. The forearm is the part of your arm between the wrist and the elbow. You may be able…

READ MORE
Tendonitis of Wrist
Medically reviewed by William Morrison, MD
Learn about tendonitis of the wrist. Are you experiencing stiffness, strain, and pain in your wrist? It could be caused by tendonitis. This article…

READ MORE
How Collagen Can Boost Your Body’s Skin, Muscle, and Gut
Medically reviewed by Cynthia Cobb, DNP, APRN
Collagen is an essential building block for the entire body, from skin to gut, and more. Here's five changes you may see or feel just by taking more…

READ MORE
How to Fall Asleep in 10, 60, or 120 Seconds
Medically reviewed by Deborah Weatherspoon, PhD, RN, CRNA
You can do a lot of prep work to make the perfect sleep environment. But if that doesn't work, here are six other hacks to try.

READ MORE
Do You Live with Anxiety? Here Are 11 Ways to Cope
Medically reviewed by Timothy J. Legg, PhD, PsyD
Identifying your triggers can take some time and self-reflection. In the meantime, there are things you can try to help calm or quiet your anxiety…

READ MORE
I Don’t Like Meditating. Here’s Why I Do It Anyway
Medically reviewed by Timothy J. Legg, PhD, PsyD
If your take on meditation is that it's boring or too "new age," then read this. One man shares how - and why - he learned to meditate even though he…

READ MORE

 
Get our wellness newsletter
Fitness and nutrition tips, health news, and more.

Enter your email
Your privacy is important to us

About Us
Health Topics
Health News
Contact Us
Advertise With Us
Advertising Policy
Newsletters
Careers
Privacy Policy
Terms Of Use
Find An Online Doctor
© 2005-2019 Healthline Media a Red Ventures Company. All rights reserved. Our website services, content, and products are for informational purposes only. Healthline Media does not provide medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment. See additional information.