Skip to site navigationSkip to Content
Mayo Clinic
Search
Search Mayo Clinic
Request an Appointment
Find a Doctor
Find a Job
Give Now
Log in to Patient Account
English
Twitter
 
Facebook
 
Pinterest
 
YouTube
Patient Care & Health Info
Departments & Centers
Research
Education
For Medical Professionals
Products & Services
Giving to Mayo Clinic
Patient Care & Health Information
Diseases & Conditions
Wrist pain
Symptoms & causes
Diagnosis & treatment
Doctors & departments
Print
Overview
Wrist pain is often caused by sprains or fractures from sudden injuries. But wrist pain can also result from long-term problems, such as repetitive stress, arthritis and carpal tunnel syndrome.

Because so many factors can lead to wrist pain, diagnosing the exact cause can be difficult, but an accurate diagnosis is essential for proper treatment and healing.

Products & Services
Book: Mayo Clinic Guide to Pain Relief
Show more products from Mayo Clinic
Symptoms
Wrist pain may vary, depending on the cause. For example, osteoarthritis pain is often described as being similar to a dull toothache, while carpal tunnel syndrome usually causes a pins-and-needles feeling or a tingling sensation, especially at night. The precise location of your wrist pain also provides clues to what's behind your symptoms.

When to see a doctor
Not all wrist pain requires medical care. Minor sprains and strains usually respond to ice, rest and over-the-counter pain medications. But if pain and swelling last longer than a few days or become worse, see your doctor. Delayed diagnosis and treatment can lead to poor healing, reduced range of motion and long-term disability.

Causes
Damage to any of the parts of your wrist can cause pain and affect your ability to use your wrist and hand.

Injuries
Sudden impacts. Wrist injuries often occur when you fall forward onto your outstretched hand. This can cause sprains, strains and even fractures. A scaphoid fracture involves a bone on the thumb side of the wrist. This type of fracture may not show up on X-rays immediately after the injury.
Repetitive stress. Any activity that involves repetitive wrist motion — from hitting a tennis ball or bowing a cello to driving cross-country — can inflame the tissues around joints or cause stress fractures, especially when you perform the movement for hours on end without a break. De Quervain's disease is a repetitive stress injury that causes pain at the base of the thumb.
Arthritis
Osteoarthritis. This type of arthritis occurs when the cartilage that cushions the ends of your bones deteriorates over time. Osteoarthritis in the wrist is uncommon and usually occurs only in people who have injured that wrist in the past.
Rheumatoid arthritis. A disorder in which the body's immune system attacks its own tissues, rheumatoid arthritis commonly involves the wrist. If one wrist is affected, the other one usually is, too.
Other diseases and conditions
Wrist bones
Wrist bones
Carpal tunnel syndrome. Carpal tunnel syndrome develops when there's increased pressure on the median nerve as it passes through the carpal tunnel, a passageway in the palm side of your wrist.
Ganglion cysts. These soft tissue cysts occur most often on the part of your wrist opposite your palm. Ganglion cysts may be painful, and pain may either worsen or improve with activity.
Kienbock's disease. This disorder typically affects young adults and involves the progressive collapse of one of the small bones in the wrist. Kienbock's disease occurs when the blood supply to this bone is compromised.
Risk factors
Wrist pain can happen to anyone — whether you're very sedentary, very active or somewhere in between. But your risk may be increased by:

Sports participation. Wrist injuries are common in many sports, both those that involve impact and those that involve repetitive stress on the wrist. These can include football, bowling, golf, gymnastics, snowboarding and tennis.
Repetitive work. Almost any activity that involves your hands and wrists — even knitting and cutting hair — if performed forcefully enough and often enough can lead to disabling wrist pain.
Certain diseases or conditions. Pregnancy, diabetes, obesity, rheumatoid arthritis and gout may increase your risk of developing carpal tunnel syndrome.
Prevention
It's impossible to prevent the unforeseen events that often cause wrist injuries, but these basic tips may offer some protection:

Build bone strength. Getting adequate amounts of calcium — 1,000 milligrams a day for most adults and at least 1,200 milligrams a day for women over age 50, — can help prevent fractures.
Prevent falls. Falling forward onto an outstretched hand is the main cause of most wrist injuries. To help prevent falls, wear sensible shoes. Remove home hazards. Light up your living space. And install grab bars in your bathroom and handrails on your stairways, if necessary.
Use protective gear for athletic activities. Wear wrist guards for high-risk activities, such as football, snowboarding and rollerblading.
Pay attention to ergonomics. If you spend long periods at a keyboard, take regular breaks. When you type, keep your wrist in a relaxed, neutral position. An ergonomic keyboard and foam or gel wrist support may help.

By Mayo Clinic Staff
Diagnosis & treatment
Oct. 26, 2017PrintShare on: FacebookTwitter
Show references
Related
Golf and Wrist Pain
Associated Procedures
Arthroscopy
Bone scan
CT scan
Show more associated procedures
Products & Services
Book: Mayo Clinic Guide to Pain Relief
Show more products and services from Mayo Clinic
Wrist pain
Symptoms & causes
Diagnosis & treatment
Doctors & departments
Advertisement

Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.

Advertising & Sponsorship
PolicyOpportunitiesAd Choices
Mayo Clinic Marketplace
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic.

NEW – Guide to Fibromyalgia
Instant access – Mayo Clinic Health Letter
Diabetes? This diet works …
Stop osteoporosis in its tracks
The Mayo Clinic Diet Online

CON-20129033
Patient Care & Health Information
Diseases & Conditions
Wrist pain
Mayo Clinic
Request AppointmentContact UsAbout Mayo ClinicEmployeesFind a JobSite MapAbout This Site
Twitter
Facebook
Pinterest
YouTube
Mayo Clinic is a not-for-profit organization. Make a donation.
Any use of this site constitutes your agreement to the Terms and Conditions and Privacy Policy linked below.

Terms and Conditions
Privacy Policy
Notice of Privacy Practices
Notice of Nondiscrimination
A single copy of these materials may be reprinted for noncommercial personal use only. "Mayo," "Mayo Clinic," "MayoClinic.org," "Mayo Clinic Healthy Living," and the triple-shield Mayo Clinic logo are trademarks of Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research.

This website is certified by Health On the Net Foundation. Click to verify.This site complies with the HONcode standard for trustworthy health information:
verify here.
© 1998-2019 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.
