


NEWSLETTER

Why does my wrist hurt?
Causes
Symptoms
Diagnosis
Treatment and prevention
If you buy something through a link on this page, we may earn a small commission. How this works.
Wrist pain is a common condition with various causes. The wrist joint plays a role in basic movements, from texting to writing. When pain occurs, it can interfere with day-to-day activities and even impact a person's quality of life.

The wrist is not one joint. Instead, it's made up of several small joints where the bones of the hand and forearm meet.

Wrist pain can develop due to a sudden impact or injury. For example, a wrist sprain can cause pain if a ligament is overstretched. This type of wrist pain usually comes on suddenly when the injury occurs. Here we will explore the common causes, symptoms, and treatment options.

Fast facts on wrist pain:
If any parts of the wrist, including the bones, ligaments, or tendons, become injured, it can lead to wrist pain.
Wrist pain that is reoccurring is often due to certain conditions, such repetitive stress injuries and inflammation of the joints.
Wrist pain can also occur over a long period.
What causes wrist pain?
Pain may occur for many reasons, whether simple fatigue or an underlying issue. Commonly, injuries to the wrist are the main cause. Squashing the nerves that pass through the wrist can also produce pain.

The most common causes include the following:

Carpal tunnel syndrome
The most common cause of wrist pain is injury to the wrist, which can come with overexertion or exercise.
Carpel tunnel syndrome is a condition that develops when a ligament thickens and puts pressure on a nerve. The nerve is squeezed, which can cause pain, numbness, and weakness in the hand.

People who are obese or those who have diabetes or arthritis are at an increased risk of developing carpal tunnel syndrome.

The condition is also linked with repetitive work that involves lifting, typing, or using equipment that vibrates the hand.

Osteoarthritis
Osteoarthritis causes inflammation of the joints and occurs when the cartilage that covers the bones wears away. The condition can affect a wide range of joints, including the wrist. Osteoarthritis of the wrist tends to occur most often in people who are middle age or older, and those with a family history of the condition.

Rheumatoid arthritis
Rheumatoid arthritis is an autoimmune disease where healthy tissues are broken down by the body's immune system. This can cause wrist pain if the joints in the area are affected.

De Quervain's disease
In this condition, tendons and their coverings on the thumb side of the wrist become inflamed and swell. The exact cause is not known, but it is often associated with an injury to the area or overuse. Symptoms include a grating feeling inside the wrist, swelling, and weakness along the wrist, forearm, and thumb.

Repetitive motion syndrome
As the name suggests, repetitive motion syndrome occurs from repeating a task over and over again, such as typing, or knitting. Overworking the joint can cause it to swell, putting pressure on the surrounding nerves.

It can affect many joints in the body, including the wrist.

Triangular fibrocartilage complex injury
The triangular fibrocartilage is located on the pinky side of the wrist. It acts as a cushion and support for the small bones. The cartilage can wear away over time or tear due to an injury.

Wrist tendonitis
Wrist tendonitis can occur when the tendons of the wrist develop small tears or become irritated and inflamed. The condition usually occurs due to repetitive movement involving the wrist.

Wrist bursitis
Bursa are small fluid-filled sacs that help cushion joints. When these become inflamed it is referred to as bursitis. These can occur in many areas of the body, including the wrist. Symptoms include tenderness over the tendons of the wrist, redenss in the region, and swelling.

Ganglion cyst
This cause of wrist pain is due to fluid-filled soft tissue cysts that often develop on the wrist opposite the palm but will occur on the palmar aspect of the wrist. Smaller cysts often tend to hurt more than large cysts.

Wrist sprain
According to the American Society for Surgery of the Hand, a wrist sprain is usually caused by falling and bending the wrist backward when the hand hits the ground. This movement overstretches the ligament.

MEDICAL NEWS TODAY NEWSLETTER
Stay in the know. Get our free daily newsletter
Expect in-depth, science-backed toplines of our best stories every day. Tap in and keep your curiosity satisfied.

Enter your email
Your privacy is important to us

Symptoms of wrist pain
The symptoms of wrist pain include soreness, aching, and swelling in the wrist.
Wrist pain symptoms can vary depending on the cause. Some people may have pain that they describe as achy or dull; others may have pain that is sharp. The location of the pain can also vary.

In addition to pain, other symptoms may develop. Symptoms of an injury, such as a wrist sprain, can include swelling and bruising. Numbness, tingling, and weakness of the hand might also occur when pain is due to carpal tunnel syndrome.

Some people may develop the following symptoms:

Stiffness - in the wrist and potentially the fingers.
Trouble gripping objects - grasping or holding on may be difficult or uncomfortable.
A clicking sound when moving the wrist - this can be more severe after periods of rest.
Depending on the cause, symptoms may be mild to start and become worse as time goes on.

At first, pain may only occur during certain activities. In time, as the condition worsens, pain might occur even at rest. Numbness can also progress to the point where a person cannot feel cold or heat and may drop things.

When to see a doctor for wrist pain
It's important to see a doctor if:

Pain is interfering with everyday activities.
Numbness or tingling is becoming worse, and there is little or no feeling in the fingers or hand.
Simple hand movements are no longer possible.
Weakness makes holding things difficult.
Complications of wrist pain can include weakness and a decreased ability to carry out activities such as gripping objects and using a keyboard.

powered by Rubicon Project
How is wrist pain diagnosed?
After a physical exam and symptom review, a doctor may also diagnose wrist pain and the underlying condition by:

Medical imaging scans - including an X-ray, CT scan, and MRI.
Arthroscopy - this procedure involves a small cut on the wrist. A small instrument that has a tiny camera attached is inserted in through the cut. The pictures from the camera are then projected onto a computer monitor for the doctor to see.
Nerve conduction studies - these measure how fast nerve impulses travel through the carpal tunnel region of the wrist.
Typically, invasive diagnosis techniques are only used after rest and recovery from injury have been unsuccessful.

Treatment and prevention of wrist pain
Treatment for wrist pain depends on the cause of the pain and its severity. The least invasive treatment is given first before treatments are recommended. They include:

Home treatment - often simply resting the wrist as much as possible to allow it time to heal is effective. Pain medication and ice may also be recommended to reduce inflammation and pain.
Splints - in some cases, wearing a wrist splint can help. Splinting may prevent certain wrist movements that cause irritation. A splint might also reduce squeezing of the nerve.If you want to buy a wrist splint, then there is an excellent selection online.
Exercises - depending on the type of pain, wrist exercises may work. Certain exercises can be prescribed to stretch and lengthen muscles and tendons. When it comes to which exercises to do, patients should get recommendations from a doctor or physical therapist.
Additional treatment - cortisone injections, which decrease inflammation and reduce pain can be effective.
Surgery - only used if less invasive treatments have not worked. The type of surgery performed depends on the cause of the pain. Surgery for carpal tunnel syndrome involves cutting a ligament in the wrist to release pressure on the nerve.
Treatments are undertaken by process of elimination until the condition is resolved. Physiotherapy may also help in some cases.

Using proper posture when sitting at a workstation, and keeping the wrists in a relaxed position.
Considering a wrist-friendly keyboard if long hours are spent at the keyboard.
Learning how to use hand tools properly, so less stress is placed on the hands and wrists.
Taking regular breaks from using a keyboard.
Using wrist guards to prevent injuries when participating in sports, such as skateboarding, snowboarding, and rollerblading.
We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.
Bones / OrthopedicsNeurology / NeurosciencePain / AnestheticsRheumatology
 5 sourcescollapsed






Medically reviewed by William Morrison, M.D. on May 23, 2017 — Written by MaryAnn De Pietro, CRT

Latest news
Do past medicines hold the answer to antibiotic resistance?
Cancer survivors report an information gap in treatment side effects
How fruit and vegetable compounds help prevent colorectal cancer
Letter from the Editor: Feeling grateful
Do soft drinks affect women's bone health?

Popular in: Bones / Orthopedics
Pain at big toe joint: Everything you need to know
7 stretches and exercises for scoliosis
What to know about front shoulder pain
How to prevent rotator cuff injuries
What to know about leg cramps at night



RELATED COVERAGE
Sprained finger: Everything you need to know
Learn about sprained fingers, an injury that causes pain in one or more of the fingers. Included are details on how to recognize a sprain from a break.

READ MORE
What is causing the pain in my shoulder blade?
There are many different possible causes of shoulder blade pain. In this article, we take a look at some common ones and their treatment options.

READ MORE
What are the causes of forearm pain?
A look at forearm pain, a condition characterized by pain between the elbow and the wrist. Included is detail on the treatment options and prevention.

READ MORE
What is causing this rash on my wrist?
There are many different causes of a rash on the wrist, including eczema, allergic reactions to metals in jewelry, and other skin conditions. Here…

READ MORE

 
Get our newsletter
Health tips, wellness advice and more.

Enter your email
Your privacy is important to us

Popular News
Editorial Articles
All News Topics
Knowledge Center
Ad Policy
Newsletters
Share Our Content
About Us
Our Editorial Team
Careers
Contact Us
Advertise With MNT
Privacy
Terms
© 2004-2019 Healthline Media UK Ltd, Brighton, UK, a Red Ventures Company. All rights reserved. MNT is the registered trade mark of Healthline Media. Any medical information published on this website is not intended as a substitute for informed medical advice and you should not take any action before consulting with a healthcare professional.