Skip navigation
National Institutes of HealthU.S. National Library of Medicine
MedlinePlus Trusted Health Information for You
Search MedlinePlus
Search MedlinePlus
GO
About MedlinePlus What's New Site Map Customer Support
Health TopicsDrugs & SupplementsVideos & Tools
Español
You Are Here:Home → Medical Encyclopedia → Wrist pain
Wrist pain
Email this page to a friend Print Facebook Twitter Pinterest
Wrist pain is any pain or discomfort in the wrist.

Causes
Carpal tunnel syndrome: A common cause of wrist pain is carpal tunnel syndrome. You may feel aching, burning, numbness, or tingling in your palm, wrist, thumb, or fingers. The thumb muscle can become weak, making it difficult to grasp things. Pain may go up to your elbow.

Carpal tunnel syndrome occurs when the median nerve gets compressed at the wrist because of swelling. This is the nerve in the wrist that allows feeling and movement to parts of the hand. Swelling can occur if you:

Do repetitive movements with your wrist, such as typing on a computer keyboard, using a computer mouse, playing racquetball or handball, sewing, painting, writing, or using a vibrating tool
Are pregnant, menopausal, or overweight
Have diabetes, premenstrual syndrome, an underactive thyroid, or rheumatoid arthritis
Injury: Wrist pain with bruising and swelling is often a sign of an injury. Signs of a possible broken bone include deformed joints and inability to move the wrist, hand, or a finger. There can also be cartilage injuries in the wrist. Other common injuries include sprain, strain, tendinitis, and bursitis.

Arthritis:Arthritis is another common cause of wrist pain, swelling, and stiffness. There are many types of arthritis:

Osteoarthritis occurs with age and overuse.
Rheumatoid arthritis generally affects both wrists.
Psoriatic arthritis accompanies psoriasis.
Infectious arthritis is a medical emergency. Signs of an infection include redness and warmth of the wrist, fever above 100°F (37.7°C), and recent illness.
Other Causes

Gout: This occurs when your body produces too much uric acid, a waste product. The uric acid forms crystals in the joints, rather than being excreted in the urine.
Pseudogout: This occurs when calcium deposits in the joints, causing pain, redness, and swelling. The wrists and knees are most often affected.
CLICK TO KEEP READING
Wrist Injuries and Disorders
Wrist Injuries and Disorders
Read more
NIH MedlinePlus Magazine
NIH MedlinePlus Magazine
Read more
Health Topics A-Z
Health Topics A-Z
Read more
Was this page helpful?
YesNo
A.D.A.M Quality Logo
A.D.A.M., Inc. is accredited by URAC, also known as the American Accreditation HealthCare Commission (www.urac.org). URAC's accreditation program is an independent audit to verify that A.D.A.M. follows rigorous standards of quality and accountability. A.D.A.M. is among the first to achieve this important distinction for online health information and services. Learn more about A.D.A.M.'s editorial policy, editorial process and privacy policy. A.D.A.M. is also a founding member of Hi-Ethics and subscribes to the principles of the Health on the Net Foundation (www.hon.ch).

The information provided herein should not be used during any medical emergency or for the diagnosis or treatment of any medical condition. A licensed physician should be consulted for diagnosis and treatment of any and all medical conditions. Call 911 for all medical emergencies. Links to other sites are provided for information only -- they do not constitute endorsements of those other sites. Copyright 1997-2019, A.D.A.M., Inc. Duplication for commercial use must be authorized in writing by ADAM Health Solutions.

A.D.A.M Logo
Get updates Subscribe to RSS Follow us Twitter Facebook
Disclaimers Copyright Privacy Accessibility Guidelines for Links Viewers & Players MedlinePlus Connect for EHRs For Developers
U.S. National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health
Page last updated: 06 November 2019
