Why To Read
home
about
ways to read better
latest book lists
contact us
Philosophy Books: 10 Best Philosophy Books Of All Time
Posted by Why Read | May 29, 2014 | Philosophy Books

These thinkers affected the course of history with their work, and the legacy of many of their studies are relevant now more than ever.

10 Best Philosophy Books Of All Time
To gain a good understanding of western philosophy, you have to cover the basic teachings of some of the most influential philosophers. Below we have compiled a list of 10 Best Philosophy Books everyone must read to gain a better understanding of western philosophy.

1. The Republic – Plato
Plato’s Republic is unparalleled in its coverage of all areas of life.

While Plato addresses metaphysical issues, he does so with language and analogies that most people can grasp with studious reading.

But Plato talks about much more than metaphysics. Marriage, music, war, kings, procreation and more are all topics of discussion for Plato’s dialog.

Check Amazon

2. Nicomachean Ethics – Aristotle
In the Nicomachean Ethics, Aristotle’s guiding question is: what is the best thing for a human being? His answer is happiness, but he means, not something we feel, but rather a specially good kind of life.

Happiness is made up of activities in which we use the best human capacities. 

Both ones that contribute to our flourishing as members of a community, and ones that allow us to engage in god-like contemplation.

Check Amazon

3. A History Of Western Philosophy by Bertrand Russell
Since its first publication in 1945 Lord Russell’s A History of Western Philosophy has been universally acclaimed as the outstanding one-volume work on the subject

Unparalleled in its comprehensiveness, its clarity, its erudition, its grace and wit.

Check Amazon

4. Beyond Good And Evil by Friedrich Nietzsche
Beyond Good and Evil confirmed Nietzsche’s position as the towering European philosopher of his age.

The work dramatically rejects the tradition of Western thought with its notions of truth and God, good and evil.

Nietzsche demonstrates that the Christian world is steeped in a false piety and infected with a ‘slave morality’.

Check Amazon

5. Zen And The Art Of Motorcycle Maintenance by Robert M. Pirsig
In his autobiographical first novel, Pirsig wrestles both with the ghost of his past and with the most important philosophical questions of the 20th century.

Such as why has technology alienated us from our world?  What are the limits of rational analysis? If we can’t define the good, how can we live it?

An interesting examination of these questions in this well loved popular philosophy book.

Check Amazon

6. Descartes: Meditations On First Philosophy by René Descartes
The book is made up of six meditations, in which Descartes first discards all belief in things which are not absolutely certain, and then tries to establish what can be known for sure.

The meditations were written as if he were meditating for 6 days. Each meditation refers to the last one as “yesterday”.

Well worth trying.

Check Amazon

7. World As Will And Representation by Arthur Schopenhauer
If you are clever enough to shave away the nagging scientific details which have expired with time (as they all do), as well as the great philosopher’s personal opinions, you will find this to be one of the greatest works ever written.

For me, it was the end of philosophy; good answers to the questions I have always wrestled. An important thing to remember about Schopenhauer is that, as far as I know, he is the last great system-builder, the last philosopher in the traditional sense, who set out to create an entire picture of the world.

His concept of the will, when fully grasped, is powerful and very simple.

Check Amazon

8. Meditations by Marcus Aurelius
Written by an intellectual Roman emperor, the Meditations offer a wide range of spiritual reflections developed as the leader struggled to understand himself and the universe.

Marcus Aurelius covers topics as diverse as the question of virtue, human rationality, the nature of the gods, and his own emotions, spanning from doubt and despair to conviction and exaltation.

A great work to learn more about Stoic philosophy.

Check Amazon

9. Lao Tsu: Tao Te Ching by Laozi
Lao-tzu’s Tao Te Ching, or Book of the Way, is the classic manual on the art of living and one of the wonders of the world.

In eighty-one brief chapters, the Tao Te Ching looks at the basic predicament of being alive and gives advice that imparts balance and perspective, a serene and generous spirit.

This book is about wisdom in action.

Check Amazon

10. The Brothers Karamazov by Fyodor Dostoyevsky
The Brothers Karamazov is a passionate philosophical novel set in 19th century Russia, that enters deeply into the ethical debates of God, free will, and morality.

It is a spiritual drama of moral struggles concerning faith, doubt, and reason, set against a modernizing Russia.

Check Amazon

So get into a little philosophy with these 10 best philosophy books of all time.

Check Our Top Read For NOVEMBER
"The Starless Sea"

BUY IT NOW
SHARE: 
RELATED POSTS
12 Most Profound Last Sentences From Books That Stay With You Long After You Read Them
12 Most Profound Last Sentences From Books That Stay With You Long After You Read Them
March 26, 2015

Easy Philosophy Books – Getting Started in 2017
Easy Philosophy Books – Getting Started in 2017
May 11, 2017

10 Great Books That Will Make You Change Your Life
10 Great Books That Will Make You Change Your Life
May 20, 2015

What is Stoicism? All You Need To Know About Stoicism in 3 Books
What is Stoicism? All You Need To Know About Stoicism in 3 Books
August 20, 2014

Leave a reply
You must be logged in to post a comment.

This site uses Akismet to reduce spam. Learn how your comment data is processed.


GET OUR FREE MONTHLY BOOK LIST REVIEWS

Enter email address...


Get Grammarly - #1 Rated Proofreading tool

SEARCH …

 
POPULAR POSTS
CATEGORIES
Art Books
Autobiography, Biography & Memoir Books
Best Selling Books
Business & Finance Books
Childrens Books
Classic Books
Cooking Books
Diet & Weight Loss Books
Dystopian & Post-Apocalyptic Books
Entrepreneur Books
Fantasy Books
Graphic Novels
Health & Fitness Books
History Books
Horror Books
Humor & Funny Books
Philosophy Books
Politics & Social Science Books
Psychology Books
Religion & Spirituality Books
Romance Books
Science & Math Books
Science Fiction Books
Self-Help Books
Thriller & Suspense Books
Travel Books
True Crime Books
Vampire Books
War & Military Books
Young Adult Books
Zombie Books

 

 
WhyToRead.com
About
Privacy Policy
Terms Of Use
Work With Us
Advertise With Us
Guest Post For Us
Contact Us
Disclaimer
As an Amazon Associate I earn from qualifying purchases.

© 2012 - 2019 WhyToRead.com | Because Reading Is Important  
We use cookies to give you the best experience on our website. If you continue to use this site we will assume that you are ok with this.OK