    
Search
Tech
Computer Hardware
Internet
Computer Software
Computer Security
Computer Peripherals
Advertisement


 HowStuffWorks  Tech  Computer  Computer Software  Programming
The Basics of C Programming
   
BY MARSHALL BRAIN & CHRIS POLLETTE
What is C?
 

C is a computer programming language. That means that you can use C to create lists of instructions for a computer to follow. C is one of thousands of programming languages currently in use. C has been around for several decades and has won widespread acceptance because it gives programmers maximum control and efficiency. C is an easy language to learn. It is a bit more cryptic in its style than some other languages, but you get beyond that fairly quickly.

C is what is called a compiled language. This means that once you write your C program, you must run it through a C compiler to turn your program into an executable that the computer can run (execute). The C program is the human-readable form, while the executable that comes out of the compiler is the machine-readable and executable form. What this means is that to write and run a C program, you must have access to a C compiler. If you are using a UNIX machine (for example, if you are writing CGI scripts in C on your host's UNIX computer, or if you are a student working on a lab's UNIX machine), the C compiler is available for free. It is called either "cc" or "gcc" and is available on the command line. If you are a student, then the school will likely provide you with a compiler -- find out what the school is using and learn about it. If you are working at home on a Windows machine, you are going to need to download a free C compiler or purchase a commercial compiler. A widely used commercial compiler is Microsoft's Visual C++ environment (it compiles both C and C++ programs). Unfortunately, this program costs several hundred dollars. If you do not have hundreds of dollars to spend on a commercial compiler, then you can use one of the free compilers available on the Web. See http://delorie.com/djgpp/ as a starting point in your search.


 
We will start at the beginning with an extremely simple C program and build up from there. I will assume that you are using the UNIX command line and gcc as your environment for these examples; if you are not, all of the code will still work fine -- you will simply need to understand and use whatever compiler you have available.

Let's get started!

1
2
(current)
3
...
40
NEXT PAGE 
Print | Citation & Date | Reprint

   
What's the Difference Between Whiskey and Bourbon?
1ST
The Battle of the Big Cats: Maine Coon vs. Norwegian Forest
2ND
What’s the Difference Between a College and a University?
3RD
What's the Difference Between a Pressure Cooker and an Instant Pot?
4TH
57 Vintage Photos That Took It Way Too Far
WorldHistoryMag.com | Sponsored
These Twins Were Named "Most Beautiful In The World," Wait Till You See Them Today
LuxuryLevels.com | Sponsored
Michael Oher Opens Up About 'The Blind Side' And Claims It's Misleading
90MIN | Sponsored
Glen Oaks Help Wanted! Up to $17-36+/Hr. Part/Full-Time Positions. Some Employers Will Train.
Jobs | Search Ads | Sponsored
Advertisement

Culture - History
The Ghost of Wild West Gunslinger Tom Horn Still Haunts Wyoming
BY NATHAN CHANDLER
Animals - Wild Animals
Pangolins: The Gentle, Ant-eating Oddballs of Africa and Asia
BY JESSLYN SHIELDS
Lifestyle - Food
Truffles: The Rarest and Most Expensive Fungi in the World
BY MICHELLE KONSTANTINOVSKY
Request Your 2020 Angelical Reading
Padre | Sponsored
The Most Terrifying Bridges in the World
Gladhealthy | Sponsored
Advertisement

Advertisement

SPONSORED

EmblemHealth Medicare - 6 days Left To Enroll
BY EMBLEMHEALTH.AFFORDABLECAREADVISOR.COM/MEDICARE/INSURANCE
RELATED

How to Uninstall Programs in Windows


How does JavaScript work and how can I build simple calculators with it?


How C Programming Works

Advertisement

SPONSORED

Find Dental Coverage Plans - Immediate Search Results
BY WWW.SMARTER.COM/HEALTH
RECOMMENDED
HowStuffWorks
What's the Difference Between Whiskey and Bourbon?
The Battle of the Big Cats: Maine Coon vs. Norwegian Forest
What’s the Difference Between a College and a University?
What's the Difference Between a Pressure Cooker and an Instant Pot?
by Taboola
Advertisement


Advertisement

HowStuffWorks
About
Podcasts
Privacy Policy
Ad Choices
Terms
Careers
Contact Us
Help
Reprints
Newsletter
Get the best of HowStuffWorks by email!

Keep up to date on: Latest Buzz · Stuff Shows & Podcasts · Tours · Weird & Wacky

Copyright © 2019 HowStuffWorks, a division of InfoSpace Holdings, LLC, a System1 Company

What's the Difference Between Whiskey and Bourbon?
Read Next Story
57 Vintage Photos That Took It Way Too Far
WorldHistoryMag.com
|
Sponsored
Read Next Story
These Twins Were Named "Most Beautiful In The World," Wait Till You See Them Today
LuxuryLevels.com
|
Sponsored
Read Next Story