 Home Jobs Tools Coding Ground Current Affairs UPSC Notes Online Tutors Whiteboard Net Meeting Tutorix   
tutorialspoint
Search your favorite tutorials...
 
  Library Videos Q/A eBooks
Technical Questions and Answers
 Related Questions & Answers
Sibling of a list element in JavaScript?
Sum of the nodes of a Singly Linked List in C Program
Generating random number list in Python
Find size of a list in Python
Extending a list in Python (5 different ways)
Different ways to clear a list in Python
List Methods in Python - in, not in, len(), min(), max()
List comprehension and ord() in Python to remove all characters other than alphabets
Iterate over a list in Python
intersection_update() in Python to find common elements in n arrays
How to list out the hidden files in a Directory using Java program?
How to get list of all files/folders from a folder in Java?
List out the default values of numeric and non-numeric primitive data types in Java?
All palindrome numbers in a list?
Add 1 to a number represented as linked list?
Selected Reading
UPSC IAS Exams Notes
Developer's Best Practices
Questions and Answers
Effective Resume Writing
HR Interview Questions
Computer Glossary
Who is Who

List of Common Reasons for Segmentation Faults in C/C++
CC++Server Side ProgrammingProgramming
The main reason for segmentation fault is accessing memory that is either not initialized, out of bounds for your program or trying to modify string literals. These may cause a segmentation fault though it is not guaranteed that they will cause a segmentation fault. Here are some of the common reasons for segmentation faults:

Accessing an array out of bounds
Dereferencing NULL pointers
Dereferencing freed memory
Dereferencing uninitialized pointers
Incorrect use of the "&" (address of) and "*" (dereferencing) operators
Improper formatting specifiers in printf and scanf statements
Stack overflow
Writing to read-only memory
raja
Ramu Prasad
Published on 28-Feb-2018 11:31:06
 Previous Page  Print PageNext Page  
Advertisements




Tutorials Point
 About us  Terms of use  Cookies Policy  FAQ's  Helping  Contact
© Copyright 2019. All Rights Reserved.