Protein
Performance
Weight Management
Vitamins & Health
Clothing & Accessories
ARTICLES
WORKOUT PLANS
COMMUNITY
Bodybuilding.com Logo

Sales &
Specials

Top 50
Products

New &
Trending
United States

Account

Cart
Search articles, products, brands
Submit Icon
Sale Ends:
08
:
20
:
17
Save $5 Off Orders of $35+

NO COUPON NEEDED

Sale Ends:
08
:
20
:
17
1 DAY ONLY SALE | 25% OFF

Use Code: 1DAYSALE

Free Shipping On Orders $49+

Learn More


Training
Exercises
How To Squat: Proper Techniques For A Perfect Squat
If you squat with proper technique and heavy (for you) poundage, you might grunt, scream, or even cry, but you probably won't be injured.

How To Squat: Proper Techniques For A Perfect Squat
Cyberpump
Cyberpump
June 06, 2017
Squatting is one of the most productive if not the best exercises out there (it's called the King of Exercises by many). It is one of the most difficult to learn as well. If you are new to this exercise, please take several training sessions practicing with an empty bar or broomstick (you can do some additional work on the leg press if needed). It's very important to get your technique down cold while the weights are still light. Your small errors with small weights will turn into BIG errors with big weights. Much of the bad press the squat has received in the media is a result of improper technique and not the exercise itself. Red flags you may encounter will be pointed out and hopefully how to avoid them.

First Things First
The first thing to discuss is not foot position or width of stance, but proper trunk position. Pretend you are a soldier and the meanest, ugliest sergeant ever just told you "TEN-HUT!" You would automatically straighten up and pull your head and shoulders back. This is the proper position of the spine for the squat. IOW, your head is pulled back; your chest is raised; and you have a slight arch in your lower back. At no time during the squat should you bend over at the low back or look down. Of course you have to bend over at the hip (more on that later). You should not look up either. OK, so you got that down?

Now, the best way to do squats is in a power rack or cage (a large rectangular rack with cross-drilled holes) so you can adjust the pins where if you have to bale, you can set the bar down without any harm. Set the pins to just below the depth you are going. They also serve as a visual cue for depth and if you go down/up crooked. Place the J hooks or posts that hold the bar for you to get under at the level of your nipple or so. Try to unrack it once to see if it's at the right height. The bar should have a knurled area in the middle (if it doesn't, find another bar or another gym) so it will not slide down your back.

null
Barbell Squat

Many people use towels or padding under the bar. Others (including me) feel this leads to some instability because the weight is "teeter tottering" on a small area on your back. If the bar is hurting you either need to add some trapezius mass, place the bar a little further down your back (it should be just above or below the sharp ridge on your scapula (shoulder blade), buy a Manta Ray, or tolerate it because it's part of the game. The Ray helps to spread the load across the shoulder, but it doesn't fit everyone well.

Now step up to the bar. Place your hands about the same width as a bench press (unless you are doing the shoulder breaker wide-grip variety) and make sure you are even on the bar before unracking. Take a deep breath, step under the bar and unrack it. Most squat injuries (according to Fred Hatfield) occur during the back up. Only take enough steps that you can clear the j-hooks or posts on the descent. Remember the "soldier position" even in the unracking and back up. Place your feet shoulder width or slightly farther apart. Think if you suspended a line from the ceiling it would brush against your medial delt and hit you in the ankle.

null
Use the "practice" sessions to get a width that fits you. You might say many powerlifters squat with a wide-stance and they are pretty strong as a group. I'll agree wholeheartedly, but I'll also point out that the conventional squat is probably more productive because you are working through a larger ROM. Learn this way and then learn the variations if you like. After you have the width right, turn your feet out at roughly a 45 degree angle. Adjust the width if need be. Now you are ready to squat.

Take a deep breath, contract your abs and descend. It should feel like you are sitting back on a chair behind you; not going straight down. Keep your knees in line with your feet. DO NOT LET YOUR KNEES BOW IN anytime during the lift! I have a Grade 1 knee sprain (MCL) from doing just this. Keep the load light enough so you won't do this and gradually build up. Many people say to try to keep your shin at a 90 degree angle to the ground. This is impossible with the regular stance squat and is only possible by a few using the wide-stance variety. Try to keep your knees from going out past your toes. Alter the width if need be. Most people can and should descend till their thighs are parallel to the ground. This is actually pretty low. A very small majority of people can't and may be better stopping just above parallel.

Don't give up on reaching parallel too quick. Also, to go even close to parallel, you have to bend over at the hip (not the spine, of course). However, you should always be more upright than bent over. Two methods of determining your shin/back position and depth is to either have an attentive and adept person monitor you from the side and/or use a video camera placed to the side and close enough to determine all angles. After you have descended to the bottom position, reverse your direction immediately (don't bounce at the bottom) and drive upwards. Try and pull your back up (hip extension) as hard as possible during the ascent.

Brooks Kubik describes this "as if a giant gorilla had a hold of your ass and your shoulder and was trying to straighten you out." Come back to a standing position, take a breath or two (or many 8^) and descend again. Remember the soldier position between reps as well. Make each rep it's own little lift. IOW, make each one count even on your warm-ups. If you maintain good form in your warm-ups, you'll likely retain it for the work sets.

Belts Or Knee Wraps
Should you wear a belt or knee wraps? The former helps to stabilize the spine by increasing intra-abdominal pressure and the latter is just a way of elevating more weight. Especially if you are getting started with the squat, go without either. Use your abdomen as the brace instead of outside help. The knee wraps serve no use except to the powerlifter who wants a bigger max. They may impede the growth of structures around the knee or even cause some harm if used chronically.

The main reason the power rack gathers dust while there is a line for the angled leg press is because squats HURT! It doesn't matter whether it's the skinny beginner using the "big wheels" on each side for the first time or the bonafide 600+ squatter stepping under an already bending bar. They both feel some pain when doing this exercise. Learn to live with it!

The most productive exercises are the most painful. It's a fact of life. If you squat with proper technique and heavy (for you) poundage, you might grunt, scream, cry, hurl and/or pass out, but you probably won't be injured and you'll make terrific headway towards your goals. Learn to be aggressive and focus your complete attention on the task at hand. Good luck and happy training!

ABOUT THE AUTHOR
Cyberpump
Cyberpump
From being THE resource for High Intensity Training (HIT), to bodybuilding, strength training for sports, strongman, and for just meeting your individual training goals.

View all articles by this author

7 COMMENTS
Log in to comment
Please keep comments positive and constructive.
Help the community by reporting inappropriate comments. Inappropriate comments may be reported and/or removed.
Please log in to comment.

POST COMMENT
Comments

Rohdeeezy
A really great read and definitely helped me get some proper form in the gym. As you pointed out, I was really struggling to get depth in my squat
and in my case it was due to tight hip flexors. I'm a software engineer so I spend a lot of time in a chair each day which was the main cause of
my problem. I found this resource which really helped me unlock my hip flexors and get some really good depth in my squats. Rick showed lots of
static and dynamic stretches. He touches heavily on doing the set of stretches in a particular sequence in order to see the most improvement. For anyone
interested, here's a link to Rick's program. tinyurl. com/y94luw2h

June 12th, 2018
Report
Reply

webpaul
Stop saying to "Try to keep your knees from going out past your toes." It's an old legend. It all depends on your mobility and if you have healthy knees.

September 20th, 2017
Report
Reply

TrainerB (Brandon)
Not everyone wants to or should be doing squats based on their ability levels. Done properly with an appropriate load they are a great exercise. Posture is very important as the article points out.

December 30th, 2016
Report
Reply

mborho (Martin Borho)
I have a Patellar Tracking issue, If I am not real careful about foot position, I am done

December 25th, 2016
Report
Reply

Whitedawg53 (Andrew White)
I've read that changing foot orientation on closed chain movements (when your feet are against a hard surface and not dangling) causes knee stress. What does the 45 degree angle pose in regards to this warning?

December 23rd, 2016
Report
Reply

AbsFarmer
What I believe he's saying is to set your feet at that angle before you squat and keep them stationary throughout the whole movement. You're right, changing feet position mid-rep is a bad idea.

August 25th, 2017
Report

ComradeQ (Phillip)
I will still always, always disagree with those who say to go without a belt. You lose nothing, no gains whatsoever, by using a belt, but you also add significant stability to your core (the most at-risk part of your body for serious injury), plus a belt (because it helps stabilize the core) also helps you lift a little bit more.

I mean seriously, there's no argument to not use them. Most studies show they don't do anything to weaken your core, but they definitely decrease the risk of injury (which is why even in raw feds and they permit belts). If someone doesn't want to use one, that's fine, they can risk their own body, but they're a piece of safety equipment and should never be told to others to not use them.

November 5th, 2016
Report
Reply

Gawayne (Lex)
Why? I'm not going for max weight, just to lean up. I don't want to spend the money, worry about the positioning, and I already wore something for hours a day that inadvertently supported my core and weakened it because of that.

February 24th, 2017
Report

acanyock
It states to have the feet positioned at a 45 degree angle. Is this ok? It seems like the notion in the fitness world, specifically amongst those that preach mobility, is to have your feet practically parallel with one another.

October 3rd, 2016
Report
Reply

jeffsimonis
As long as your knees bend in the direction that your feet are pointing, I think it should be okay. In fact, 45 degrees could be too much, or not enough. Everyone's stance will vary. Try different positions to see what feels best for you.

October 9th, 2016
Report

kevinderhouson (kevin derhouson)
If you place your feet shoulder width or so apart, and flex your glutes hard..you feet will spread to the right position for you.

October 18th, 2016
Report
Show More Replies

HOME
STORE
TRAINING
NUTRITION
HEALTH AND LIFESTYLE
WOMEN
COMMUNITY
MEMBER PROFILE
DASHBOARD

NEED HELP?
Help Center
Email Support
Live Chat
Gift Certificates
Send Us Feedback
ORDERS & SHIPPING
Order Status
Returns/Exchanges
Shipping Support
United States United States
CONNECT WITH US
JOIN OUR NEWSLETTER
Be the first to receive exciting news, features, and special offers from Bodybuilding.com!
SEND
Careers
Terms of Use
Privacy Policy
About Us
Site Map
Affiliates
Advertise with Us
Help
© 2019 Bodybuilding.com. All rights reserved. Bodybuilding.com℠ and BodySpace® are trademarks of Bodybuilding.com.
Always consult with a qualified healthcare professional prior to beginning any diet or exercise program or taking any dietary supplement. The content on our website is for informational and educational purposes only and is not intended as medical advice or to replace a relationship with a qualified healthcare professional.
Bodybuilding.com5777 N Meeker Ave, Boise, ID 83713-1520 USA  1-866-236-8417

