Sign in Register	
Go to:   
guardian.co.uk logo
News
Sport
Comment
Culture
Business
Money
Life & style
Travel
Environment
TV
Video
Data
Mobile
Offers
Jobs
News
Guardian
guardian.co.uk
Home				Recent queries				Send a query				Crossword

Lucky dip				Any answers?				About Notes and Queries				Sudoku

			
Notes and Queries
Categories
Nooks and crannies	
Yesteryear	
Semantic enigmas	
The body beautiful	
Red tape, white lies	
Speculative science	
This sceptred isle	
Root of all evil	
Ethical conundrums	
This sporting life	
Stage and screen	
Birds and the bees	


ETHICAL CONUNDRUMS

Is there a convincing philosophical rebuttal to solipsism - the theory that the self is all that you can know to exist? Or are you all figments of my imagination?
Norris McWhirter, Dublin, Ireland
That depends upon how easily you can be convinced but many people have argued that God is a perfect being and therefore (as lying is an imperfection) is no deceiver. If this is true then the objects presented to us through our senses must represent something which is also true i.e they exist. Many people would not find this a satisfactory explanation but remember kids, nihilism seriously damages your health.
David, Newport, UK
The use of the work 'my' gives it away: if the world exist only in your mind then you and the world are one and the same; there can be no real 'me'. It follows that, relative to your perceived 'me', whether the rest of the world actually exists externally or internally is irrelevant. Solipsism is a rather bland theory.
D Doran, London
Dr Johnson would rap you hard on the head and say: "Thus I refute you!"
David Dreaming Bear, Horsethief Canyon, California USA
Although solipsism may SEEM appealing, in terms of irrefutable truths, Descartes assertion 'Cogito ergo sum' - 'I think therefore I am' (although he actually said, 'I think, I exist') has many problems. It seems that no logical argument can follow from this, supposedly a priori statement, that GUARANTEES the existence of others. However, we can refute that it is an a priori statement to start with. For, because there is a thought occurring at this moment, it does not follow from any rules of logic that there were any thoughts before, or there will be any after, this thought. Also, just because there is a thought, it doesn't necessarily follow that there is necessarily a 'self', or the 'I' who is observing this thought. However, one can appeal simply to 'common sense philosophy', or 'logical positivism' as it's become known, and we can see that it is simple common sense that we are not the only beings that exist. For more read A.J. Ayer's 'Language, Truth and Logic'.
Sam Reed, Brockley, London Britain
Uh-oh - we're for it now - he's sussed that we're all figments of his imagination. Quick, everyone - scarper!
Tony Bannister, London UK
Solipsism is Descartes' famous first axiom (I think therefore I am) taken to extremes. It is remarkably difficult to move beyond this first inspired piece of philosophy to go on to prove that everything (anything?) else exists. This is the problem solipsists wrestle with. It is, of course, much simpler (under Occam's razor) to assume that the external world we perceive through our senses actually exists. The untenability of the solipsists argument is best demonstrated by a quote from a devoted solipsist who, at a philosophers convention, stated, "I'm a solipsist. And quite frankly I'm surprised there aren't more of us."
John Mullen, Kitakyushu Japan
Bertrand Russell was once approached by a woman singing the praises of solipsism as a philiosophy. She was so impressed by it that she was quite surprised many more people did not adopt it.
Alan , Brixton UK
Rene Descartes tried to answer this question in two different ways. The first statement he expressed was: "cogito ergo sum", which translates "I think therefore I am". In his view, the simple fact of having structured thoughts proved his existence and therefore by association, the reality of the world around him. But later in his book, he considered that, even more probant, was the fact that not only did he think he existed but also he doubted he existed; second statement :"Dubito ergo sum", "I doubt therefore I am". The simple fact of wondering whether he was part of a tangible world had to mean that the world and himself were thus real. Had he been a figment of someone else's imagination, he would not have had the capacity to doubt of his own existence. Also, since he was not God, he did not create the rest of his universe, therefore not only was he real but the world around him had to be as well. This is all very theoretical per say but at least, tends towards some kind of pragmatism in its most philosophical attire. I would answer the reader by saying that the simple fact he/she is asking the question proves that he/she is real and the rest of the world with it.
Frederic Bourquin, Loughton Essex
There is no real rebuttal to a Solipsist argument. The previous answers employment of Occam's Razor was also mistaken since Occam's Razor states that the theory which reqires the existence of the fewest entities is most likely to be the correct one, hence favouring solipsism. Descartes, in the Medetations puts forward two seperate attempts to re-construct the world as it is experienced, after asserting that the only thing he can be certain exists is himself. These attempts are fairly unconvincing however and the most famous (the ontological argument) relies upon the existence of God. However at the time of his writing, positing philosophical theories which questioned the existence of god tended to result in the authors execution. The most convincing solution to solipsism is to realise that it really doesn't matter. Since this is the world as we experience it, this is the world that matters to us. Though one can never be certain that anything exists beyond ones own consciousness, they still must experience the world as they do, which includes the existence of others.
Seth, Edinburgh Scotland
One night in Dublin, many years ago, a friend (who was very much under the infuence of Magic Mushrooms) asked me: "Are you real?" I took his hand, looked into his eyes and said: "I assure you with my heart and soul that, yes, I am real". He was neither reassured nor convinced. The next day at work he said: "Last night was very weird, I was convinced that everything in my life was only part of my imagination and it scared me." I told him that Solipsism was something he had to work at. He looked at me and said: "Now I know you are not real!"
Hedley McConnell, Tenerife Spain
Sartre held that the feeling of shame proved solipsism, and idealism to be false. If we are caught peeping at someone undressing in the toilet then we feel ashamed. If solpsism or idealism were true, this feeling would be false. But since we all have this feeling at one time or another Sartre held that there must exist other conscious bodies. The trouble with this is it reduces proof to emotion. It then follows that our opinion of what is real reduces to how we feel about it.
Andrew J Turner, Forestville, South Australia
It seems to me that, because other people have asked the same question - "Am I the only thing in the Universe that exists?" - that we all exist.
Mike, Haddonfield USA
Yes, there is a convincing rebuttal to YOUR solipsism - me. Unfortunately I do not find YOU to be a convincing rebuttal to MY solipsism. This proves that I am all that exists. Probably.
Jack Rawlinson, New York, USA
There is no way to prove or disprove Solipsism, however this position is an argumentative dead-end: Why should I have any INTEREST in discussing philosophy (or anything else for that matter) with someone who doesn't believe I exist, or who believes I am just a machine or conditioned robot? Why should the solipsist have any interest in such discussion with me?
Andreas Carl, Berlin, Germany
The problem with solipsism is it's very existence. If a completely solipitic being existed, it would never be able to consider the concept of solipsism. In order to do that, it would have had to become aware of itself and develop an identity including an 'I' concept. To do that, it would have needed to 'exit' it's own 'being' and consider itself from another's point of view. But, there are no others or other points of view in solipsism. It follows that a truly soliptic being has no self because it has no other selves to define itself. Individuality, loneliness, 'one', 'only', 'me'...all of these are social concepts that only make sense in a social setting. To me, this opens up a whole new series of questions such as 1) what is the nature of 'me', 'you, ... and how is it that we seem to be interconnected in such a way that you are part of my consicouness.I believe solipsism is a consequence of the very nature of the phenomenological aspects of human consciousness. It is an unfinished statement that really states: I can only feel one subject in my consciousness, me. I am aware of other subjects but only feel like one. But, hey, I might be wrong...
Mathieu Gagnon, Ottawa Canada
It seems that solipsism is a real problem in a world that depends upon the location of bodies in space. For an interesting and persuasive account of non-solisistic world, have a look at Strawson's book- Individuals-, the second chapter, 'Sounds'. In a purely auditroy world, where there is a non-material context, the only way of reporting with a substantial degree of complexity is to adopt a non-solipsist approach. Brilliant!
M. Buck, Armidale Australia
I really think everyone missed the importance of Descartes "Cognito, ergo sum". Descarte wasn't promoting solipsism, he was dissecting the excercise of logic and reason itself to a single irrefutable statement of logic. It may need additional clarification to be more solid but ultimately he identified a basic truth that cannot be undermined. All knowledge and logic is at some probablistic level except for that one. Even if I don't know if I existed before or after I know I exist know. Even if you want to debate the significance of the "I" there is still some basic sense of self I have that is supported by the act of thought itself. Unfortunately, it confines reason within myself.
Rob, Long Island, NY USA
Rob of Long Island N.Y. is spot on about Descartes: "Cognito, ergo sum"! Yes there is a logical rebuttal to “Absolute” Solipsism. And it comes from Albert Einstein’s theory of relativity no less. Anything existing alone in its own universe has no meaning. For anything to have meaning it must be able to compare itself relative to something else. For “I” to have any meaning it must be able to compare itself to “Not I”. Without the comparison between “I” and “Not I” the meaning of “I” is lost. A Solipsist mind would not know to call itself “I”!
c.c.keiser, Walnutport, PA U.S.A.
Solipsism has an inherent contradiction, which if true, disproves it is not disprovable. A solipsist could not have been born for parents would have to be imagined to have conceived it then other than itself exists and it cannot be a solipsist, or it would have to will itself to become what it is. It does not seem a thing can will itself into existence. For from what kind of existence could a thing have before it existed? That is a logical impossibility. Further, at some point, a solipsist becomes conscious, or it was eternally always conscious and will eternally always be conscious. But if it became conscious, then at one time before that it was not conscious. If it became conscious, then it became conscious of something. In order to become conscious of something, a solipsist would have to imagine it was in some place, for if it was not in any particular place it would be nowhere, But if it was in some place, then that place would be difference and separate from it, and hence place cannot be itself, and if place was not itself, then the solipsist would know there was something other than itself and that would nullify its solipsism. It cannot be either male or female since there is nothing to which its sex could be compared to except what it wants to imagine. But it could not imagine that either, or anything for that matter, for it would have to imagine something other than itself, and nothing other than it exists. It would not be able to imagine any features of itself for it would have to see outside itself to see what features it had. It would not be able to see anything for there would be nothing outside itself to see, nor would it hear anything since there is nothing outside itself that could make sound. If it made a sound, then the sound would have to take place in space and time, and space and time would be separate from the solipsist. To have meaning there must be some reference. And to have a reference, there must be a something to which a reference can be made. Therefore, for anything to have meaning, it must be able to compare itself relative to something else. And for an “I,” to have any meaning it must be able to compare itself to “Not I” and or an identity, without a comparison between an “I” and any “Not I,” the meaning of “I” is completely dispelled. Therefore, a solipsist would not have any reason to think itself has an “I.” And if there is no reason to think itself has an “I,” then it cannot think it has any existence. A solipsist, by that reason, cannot exist in the first place. Therefore solipsism is disproved.
Merrie Martino, Monongahela, USA
However one speculates about the ultimate proof or disproof of solipsism (and I should state at the outset, I’m not a solipsist, and neither are you!) there is a specific situation in which the question of solipsism is highly relevant, what’s known in the dream literature as a ‘false awakening.’ And as far as I am aware, nobody has ever proposed a fail safe means of distinguishing waking and dreaming in that situation (which means, at that moment, one is not sure whether one is awake, hence in a “world” which has conscious beings other than oneself; or in a dream, in which case one is solipsistically isolated from any “other” conscious being). Here’s how it typically occurs: You wake up (well, you think you’ve woken up), get out of bed, go to the bathroom, splash some water on your face, and depending on how long this lasts, you may get as far as getting dressed, eating breakfast or even leaving your home, and then you wake up to find yourself back in bed again. Now, you smile at how you were fooled into thinking you were awake, and happily repeat the whole series of actions again, only to find yourself once more back in bed. Now you might be a little bit uneasy, but perhaps you brush it off. Well, this can occur, 3, 6, 9 or more times (Bertrand Russell claimed to have experienced 100 successive false awakenings under anesthesia). I’ve experienced 4 or 5 of them in a row (this tends to happen fairly frequently when you’re practicing lucid dreaming). In my experience, usually about the 3rd time, it’s no longer amusing, and if you go on to a 4th or 5th awakening, it’s quite anxiety provoking, and you really want to figure out some way to tell if you’re dreaming or awake. Some people who have never experienced this just think, “try something unusual like flying or something else that’s impossible in the waking state”. Unfortunately, this doesn’t work at all; just because you try to fly and you can’t doesn’t mean you’re awake. Leading lucid dream researcher Stephen LaBerge claims he’s “proved” that it’s impossible to read more than a few lines in a dream before the words start to get blurry. Unfortunately for his proof, soon after I read that I had a lucid dream in which I materialized (yes, you can do this in lucid dreams) his book and read a few paragraphs that were very clear, so the “reading” test – to tell whether you’re awake or dreaming – doesn’t work either. If you’ve never had a very vivid lucid dream, you might think that just touching things or looking closely at things would make it easy to tell if you’re waking or dreaming. It doesn’t. I and many other people have had lucid dreams in which you touch something very carefully, examine the details of an object in exquisite detail, and you can’t tell if it’s a dream or you’re awake.
Don Salmon, Asheville USA
1. Solipsism is false because I'm not a solipsist. If solipsism were true then reality would be essentially what I make it and because I'm not a solipsist I would have made physical realism true and solipsism false. Kinda tongue in cheek but I think this line of reasoning may work 2. Solipsism does not hypothesis test well - it is un-falsifiable, has no predictive power (it is compatible with every possible observation)and no explanatory power (it doesn't explain what caused you to exist) Physical realism is falsifiable has predictive power and some (limited) explanatory power. This is all the "proof" I need
Bobby, Melbourne Australia
My comment is about Sartre - I find this convincing, because shame is not (for me) an emotion as such - that is, it's independent of how I feel (I don't want to feel it, obviously - and yet I do.) Also, regarding dreams - years ago, probably in my childhood, I 'programmed' myself against the possibility of shame - that is, the shame that would result from wetting the bed! I know I am dreaming, because sooner or later I need to urinate, and it's not possible. Also, because I can't see in dreams, so reading is not a possibility, as lights won't work, and all my dreams take place in semi-darkness. Meh, that's probably just me. It's only in lucid dreams that's there;s even an issue - and that's where my 'programming' works best.
Deborah Loraine Kean, Auckland New Zealand
Regardless of whether other people are physically there, or only there in your imagination, the observable consequence is the same. As it happens, the physical-existence account explains a great many details, whereas the imagination-existence account at best saves the appearances of the physical-existence account without adding any insight. Until such time as you are able to warp reality in the same way one might consciously manipulate the course of a lucid dream, it would appear that the imagination-existence account has no advantage over the physical-existence account. In closing, I will add that, while nothing I have said definitively resolves your question, there is perhaps a more important question for you to ask: does it matter? Regardless of whether the bed is real or imaginary, it is still very comfortable, is it not? Good night.
Roy Anderson, Chester Vermont
No. There is no way nothing is real.
Mystogan, Burnaby Canada


Add your answer



UP



				
	
Privacy policy  |  Terms & conditions  |  Advertising guide  |  A-Z index  |  Inside guardian.co.uk  |  About this site
Join our dating site today

guardian.co.uk © Guardian News and Media Limited 2011