
EDUCATION
MARKETS
SIMULATOR
YOUR MONEY
ADVISORS
ACADEMY 
Economics
GLOBAL TRADE GUIDE
MICROECONOMICS
MACROECONOMICS
BEHAVIORAL ECONOMICS
ECONOMY  ECONOMICS
Adam Smith and "The Wealth of Nations"
FACEBOOK
TWITTER
LINKEDIN
BY JOY BLENMAN  Updated Jul 26, 2019
What was the most important document published in 1776? Most Americans would probably say The Declaration of Independence. But many would argue that Adam Smith's "The Wealth of Nations" had a bigger and more global impact. 


On March 9, 1776, "An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations"—commonly referred to as simply "The Wealth of Nations"—was first published. Smith, a Scottish philosopher by trade, wrote the book to upend the mercantilist system. Mercantilism held that wealth was fixed and finite, and that the only way to prosper was to hoard gold and tariff products from abroad. According to this theory, nations should sell their goods to other countries while buying nothing in return. Predictably, countries fell into rounds of retaliatory tariffs that choked off international trade.


Adam Smith is generally regarded as the father of modern economics.

Adam Smith: The Father of Economics
Smith's Thesis
The core of Smith's thesis was that humans' natural tendency toward self-interest (or in modern terms, looking out for yourself) results in prosperity. Smith argued that by giving everyone freedom to produce and exchange goods as they pleased (free trade) and opening the markets up to domestic and foreign competition, people's natural self-interest would promote greater prosperity than with stringent government regulations.

Smith believed humans ultimately promote public interest through their everyday economic choices. “He (or she) generally, indeed, neither intends to promote the public interest nor knows how much he is promoting it. By preferring the support of domestic to that of foreign industry, he intends only his own security and by directing that industry in such a manner as its produce may be of the greatest value, he intends only his own gain and he is in this, as in many other cases, led by an invisible hand to promote an end which was no part of his intention,” he said in "An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations"

This free-market force became known as the invisible hand, but it needed support to bring about its magic.

KEY TAKEAWAYS
The central thesis of Smith's "The Wealth of Nations" is that our need to fulfill self-interest results in prosperity.
Smith believed that people promote public interest through economic choices—a free-market force that became known as the "invisible hand."
The invisible hand is what comes from the collaboration of consumers and producers in commerce.
Government interference in this process results in shortages and surpluses.
The Invisible Hand
The automatic pricing and distribution mechanisms in the economy—which Adam Smith called an "invisible hand"—interact directly and indirectly with centralized, top-down planning authorities. However, there are some meaningful conceptual fallacies in an argument that is framed as the invisible hand versus the government.

The invisible hand is not actually a distinguishable entity. Instead, it is the sum of many phenomena that occur when consumers and producers engage in commerce. Smith's insight into the idea of the invisible hand was one of the most important in the history of economics. It remains one of the chief justifications for free-market ideologies.

The invisible hand theorem (at least in its modern interpretations) suggests that the means of production and distribution should be privately owned and that if trade occurs unfettered by regulation, in turn, society will flourish organically. These arguments are naturally competitive with the concept and function of government.

The government is not serendipitous—it is prescriptive and intentional. Politicians, regulators, and those who exercise legal force (such as the courts, police, and military) pursue defined goals through coercion. However, in contrast, macroeconomic forces—supply and demand, buying and selling, profit and loss occur voluntarily until government policy inhibits or overrides them. In this sense, it is more accurate to suggest that government affects the invisible hand, not the other way around.

Government Response to the Invisible Hand
However, it is the absence of market mechanisms that frustrates government planning. Some economists refer to this as the economic calculation problem. When people and businesses individually make decisions based on their willingness to pay money for a good or service, that information is captured dynamically in the price mechanism. This, in turn, allocates resources automatically toward the most valued ends.

When governments interfere with this process, unwanted shortages and surpluses tend to occur. Consider the massive gas shortages in the United States during the 1970s. The then newly formed Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) cut production to raise oil prices. The Nixon and Ford administrations responded by introducing price controls to limit the cost of gasoline to American consumers. The goal was to make cheap gas available to the public.

Instead, gas stations had no incentive to stay open for more than a few hours. Oil companies had no incentive to increase production domestically. Consumers had every incentive to buy more gasoline than they needed. Large-scale shortages and gas lines resulted. Those gas lines disappeared almost immediately after controls were eliminated and prices were allowed to rise.

While it is tempting to say the invisible hand limits government, that wouldn't necessarily be correct. Rather, the forces that guide voluntary economic activity toward large societal benefit are the same forces that limit the effectiveness of government intervention.

The Elements of Prosperity
Boiling the principles Smith expressed regarding the invisible hand and other concepts down to essentials, Smith believed a nation needed the following three elements to bring about universal prosperity.

1. Enlightened Self-Interest
Smith wanted people to practice thrift, hard work, and enlightened self-interest. He thought the practice of enlightened self-interest was natural for the majority of people.

In his famous example, a butcher does not supply meat based on good-hearted intentions, but because he profits by selling meat. If the meat he sells is poor, he will not have repeat customers and, thus, no profit. Therefore, it's in the butcher's interest to sell good meat at a price that customers are willing to pay, so that both parties benefit in every transaction. Smith believed the ability to think long-term would curb most businesses from abusing customers. When that wasn't enough, he looked to the government to enforce laws.

Extending upon self-interest in trade, Smith saw thrift and savings as important virtues, especially when savings were used to invest. Through investment, the industry would have the capital to buy more labor-saving machinery and encourage innovation. This technological leap forward would increase returns on invested capital and raise the overall standard of living.

2. Limited Government
Smith saw the responsibilities of the government as being limited to the defense of the nation, universal education, public works (infrastructure such as roads and bridges), the enforcement of legal rights (property rights and contracts), and the punishment of crime.

The government would step in when people acted on their short-term interests and would make and enforce laws against robbery, fraud, and other similar crimes. He cautioned against larger, bureaucratic governments, writing, "there is no art which one government sooner learns of another, than that of draining money from the pockets of the people."

His focus on universal education was to counteract the negative and dulling effects of the division of labor that was a necessary part of industrialization. 

3. Solid Currency and Free-Market Economy
The third element Smith proposed was a solid currency twinned with free-market principles. By backing currency with hard metals, Smith hoped to curtail the government's ability to depreciate currency by circulating more of it to pay for wars or other wasteful expenditures.

With hard currency acting as a check on spending, Smith wanted the government to follow free-market principles by keeping taxes low and allowing free trade across borders by eliminating tariffs. He pointed out that tariffs and other taxes only succeeded in making life more expensive for the people while also stifling industry and trade abroad.

Smith’s Theories Overthrow Mercantilism
To drive home the damaging nature of tariffs, Smith used the example of making wine in Scotland. He pointed out that good grapes could be grown in Scotland in hothouses, but the extra costs of heating would make Scottish wine 30 times more expensive than French wines. Far better, he reasoned, would be to trade something Scotland had an abundance of such as wool, in return for French wine.

In other words, because France has a competitive advantage in producing wine, tariffs aimed to create and protect a domestic wine industry would just waste resources and cost the public money.

What Wasn't in "The Wealth of Nations"?
"The Wealth of Nations" is a seminal book that represents the birth of free-market economics, but it's not without faults. It lacks proper explanations for pricing or a theory of value and Smith failed to see the importance of the entrepreneur in breaking up inefficiencies and creating new markets.

Both the opponents of and believers in Adam Smith's free-market capitalism have added to the framework set up in "The Wealth of Nations." Like any good theory, free-market capitalism gets stronger with each reformulation, whether prompted by an addition from a friend or an attack from a foe.

Marginal utility, comparative advantage, entrepreneurship, the time-preference theory of interest, monetary theory, and many other pieces have been added to the whole since 1776. There is still work to be done as the size and interconnectedness of the world's economies bring up new and unexpected challenges to free-market capitalism.

The Bottom Line
The publishing of "The Wealth of Nations" marked the birth of modern capitalism as well as economics. Oddly enough, Adam Smith, the champion of the free market, spent the last years of his life as the Commissioner of Customs, meaning he was responsible for enforcing all the tariffs. He took the work to heart and burned many of his clothes when he discovered they had been smuggled into shops from abroad.

Historical irony aside, his invisible hand continues to be a powerful force today. Smith overturned the miserly view of mercantilism and gave us a vision of plenty and freedom for all. The free market he envisioned, though not yet fully realized, may have done more to raise the global standard of living than any single idea in history.

SPONSORED
Hire a Pro: Compare Financial Advisors In Your Area
Finding the right financial advisor that fits your needs doesn’t have to be hard. SmartAsset’s free tool matches you with fiduciary financial advisors in your area in 5 minutes. Each advisor has been vetted by SmartAsset and is legally bound to act in your best interests. If you’re ready to be matched with local advisors that will help you achieve your financial goals, get started now.

Compare Investment Accounts
Advertiser Disclosure
PROVIDER
NAME
DESCRIPTION



Related Articles

ECONOMICS

Adam Smith: The Father of Economics

ECONOMICS

What is the "Invisible Hand" in Capitalism?

ECONOMICS

How 5 Influential Economists Changed Americas History

ECONOMICS

Who Created Economics?

ECONOMICS

Who discovered the law of supply and demand?

MACROECONOMICS

What Does the Term 'Invisible Hand' Refer to in the Economy?




Partner Links



Related Terms
Dispelling Mysteries About the Invisible Hand
Invisible hand is a metaphor for how, in a free market economy, self-interested individuals operate to promote the general benefit of society at large. more
What Is Self-Interest?
Self-interest refers to actions that elicit personal benefit. Economist Adam Smith studied self-interest and its positive influence on the economy. more
Classical Economics and the Evolutions of Capitalism
Classical economics refers to a body of work on market theories and economic growth which emerged during the 18th and 19th centuries. more
Tariff
A tariff is a tax imposed by one country on the goods and services imported from another country. more
Rational Choice Theory Definition
Rational choice theory says individuals rely on rational calculations to make rational choices that result in outcomes aligned with their best interests. more
Exploring How an Economy Works and the Various Types of Economies
An economy is the large set of interrelated economic production and consumption activities which aid in determining how scarce resources are allocated. more
TRUSTe
About Us
Editorial Policy
Privacy Policy
Terms of Use
Advertise
Contact Us
Dictionary
News
Careers
#
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
J
K
L
M
N
O
P
Q
R
S
T
U
V
W
X
Y
Z
Investopedia is part of the Dotdash publishing family.
The Balance 
Lifewire 
TripSavvy 
The Spruce
and more

