Skip to main content
SearchRSS
 
Black Friday
 
Best Picks
 
News
 
Phones
 
TVs
 
Security
 
Reviews
 More 
Forums
Holiday Guide 2019
TRENDING
Black Friday Deals
 
Amazon
 
Walmart
 
Best Buy
 
AirPods Deals
 
iPhone 11 Pro Max
 
VPN
Tom's Guide is supported by its audience. When you purchase through links on our site, we may earn an affiliate commission. Learn more
Home News
PS5: Release date, price, specs, games and more
By Michael Andronico 3 days ago Consoles 

Everything we know about the PS5

 
 
 
 

The PS5's launch is creeping ever closer, and the news and rumors just keep flying. We already have some official info on the PlayStation 5, including its release date and next-gen specs. But there's still plenty we don't know about Sony's upcoming console, which is why we're compiling all of the PS5 rumors we're hearing right here.

PS5 cheat sheet: what you need to know
Release date: Holiday 2020
Price: TBD
Key Games: Watch Dogs: Legion, Rainbow Six Quarantine, The Elder Scrolls VI; full PS4 backwards compatibility
Specs: 8-core AMD Zen CPU, AMD Navi GPU, custom SSD, 4K Blu-ray player
Key Features: Ultra-fast loading times, ray tracing, 4K visuals at 120Hz, haptic controller
Latest PS5 News and Rumors (November 2019)
The PS5 could support Nvidia G-Sync, thanks to Nvidia opening up its adaptive sync technology to AMD graphics cards. That should mean even smoother performance on G-Sync displays.
A Sony patent discovered by RespawnFirst reveals how the PS5 could allow for a much deeper way for players to share user-generated content.
PS5 release date
Sony Interactive Entertainment CEO Jim Ryan confirmed to Wired that the PlayStation 5 will launch in Holiday 2020. That will put it right up against Xbox's Project Scarlett.

Black Friday deals: see all the best offers right now!
Interestingly, the PS5 may launch alongside a PS5 Pro model late next year. As spotted by Wccftech, Japanese journalist Zenji Nishikawa noted on a live stream that Sony's console will release in both a base and "Pro" variation in Holiday 2020. This seems strange given that the core PS5 already seems to be targeting high-end performance, but for what its worth, Nishikawa has previously made correct predictions around the Nintendo Switch Lite and PS4 Pro.

PS5 price
The PS4 found big success by undercutting the Xbox One at launch with its $399 price tag, but the PS5 might not be quite as affordable. In his quarterly forecast (as reported by Twinfinite), Ace Research Institute analyst Hideki Yasuda predicts that the system will launch for $499, which is $100 more than what the PS4 and PS4 Pro sold for at launch.

PS5 specs
(Image credit: Future)
In an interview with Wired, Sony's Mark Cerny revealed several key specs for Sony's next-generation console, which has yet to receive an official name.

The console will be powered by a CPU based on AMD's third-generation, eight-core Ryzen processor, as well as a custom GPU based on the AMD Radeon Navi line. That graphics card will allow the PS5 to deliver ray tracing, which is an ultra-realistic lighting technology that was first made popular by Nvidia's RTX cards. As noted by TFT Central, the PS5 could even support Nvidia G-Sync, thanks to Nvidia opening up the technology to AMD GPUs.

According to a translated tweet from known hardware leaker Komachi Ensaka, the PS5's fast 2-GHz GPU could double the power of the Xbox One X, and deliver comparable performance to Nvidia's RTX 2080.

BREAKING: THIS IS PS5. According to this leak- the GPU will be clocked at an insane 2ghz.This equates to 9.2 TF on the RDNA architecture. Or roughly 14 TF on the GCN Architecture aka over double the power of the X1X. Almost RTX2080 power.In English: it's very powerful https://t.co/09rB49ugBTAugust 13, 2019

The system's CPU will allow for 3D audio, which promises to be more immersive than that of the PS4 whether you're playing with headphones or through your TV speakers. The PS5's massive power will also allow for resolutions of up to 8K (for reference, the PS4 Pro maxes out at 4K.) The PlayStation 5 will also feature a 4K Blu-ray player for physical discs.

Cerny noted that the system will feature a speedy SSD (solid state drive) for loading games faster. In a demonstration, Cerny showed off that the system's new SSD, a segment of Marvel's Spider-Man that normally took 15 seconds to load took under a second. Additionally, Sony confirmed that the PS5 will support physical discs. In a follow-up with Wired in October, Cerny also noted that the SSD may allow players to download specific portions of games, such as the story campaign or multiplayer suite.

Sony demonstrated even further just how powerful the system's new SSD will be at a corporate strategy meeting in May. In a statement sent out after the meeting, Sony noted that the next-gen PlayStation will deliver more immersive experiences via "dramatically increased graphics rendering speeds, achieved through the employment of further improved computational power and a customized ultra-fast, broadband SSD."


A video from the meeting posted by The Wall Street Journal's Takashi Mochizuki shows the same Spider-Man load test that Cerny gave to Wired. In it, a new area can be shown loading in less than a second on the next-gen PlayStation, compared to 8 seconds on a PS4 Pro.

In an interview with Cnet in June 2019, PlayStation CEO Jim Ryan revealed that the PS5 will support 4K visuals at a refresh rate of 120Hz, which could lead to extra-smooth graphics for folks with high-refresh-rate displays. In September 2019, Ryan noted on the PlayStation blog that the PS5 will have the ability to "suspend gameplay with much lower power consumption than PS4," which he says would save close to the average electricity use of 1,000 US homes if one million users were to enable the feature.

A Sony patent discovered by gaming analyst Daniel Ahmad suggests that Sony is working on an AI voice assistant dubbed PlayStation Assist, which would allow you to get in-game help in real time by simply asking questions with your voice. This sounds like an expanded version of what Xbox offers with Alexa and Google Assistant, with Microsoft's console already allowing you to open apps and games via voice controls.


PS5 controller
In October 2019, Sony provided Wired with an exclusive look at the next DualShock, which is reportedly very similar in design to the DualShock 4. The new controller appears to have some sort of microphone (perhaps for the system's rumored voice assistant) and will sport haptic feedback for more immersive rumble.

In demonstrations for Wired, Sony showed off how the controller could make you feel the difference between track and dirt in a racing game, or the difference between trudging through sand and gliding on ice in a platformer. The new DualShock will also have adaptive triggers, which will allow you to better feel the tactile sensation of things such as firing a bow and arrow or driving off-road. 

PS5 design
(Image credit: LetsGoDigital)
A Sony patent discovered in August 2019 could give us a clue about the PS5's potential design. The patent images show what looks like a chunky game console, complete with a slew of USB ports, a disc drive, and a unique V-shaped chassis that could help keep the system cool. 

The folks at LetsGoDigital mocked up their own PS5 render based on the patent images, proving how the odd shape could actually turn out to be an attractive game console.

The folks at Gizmodo were sent images of the alleged PS5 dev kit, which are reportedly identical to the patent images that have been circulating for months. What's more, the report claims that both the PS5 and Xbox Scarlett will pack integrated cameras for hassle-free livestreaming. 


In October 2019, images of the alleged dev kit leaked via Zone of Tech. In them, we can see the same bulky design, complete with multiple USB ports, a Blu-ray drive and power, reset and eject buttons.

PS5 features: VR, cloud gaming and more
We already know that the PS5 will support the PlayStation VR headset, and could usher in a new version of the popular virtual reality accessory, possibly labeled PSVR 2. A new patent seems to indicate that the cameras on the PSVR 2 are going to replace the PlayStation Camera that came with the original PSVR. In theory, it should make your movements more accurate. On top of that, the cameras in the front of the headset will allow you to see what’s going on around you, so everything will seem transparent. The patent also indicates that the PSVR 2 might even be wireless as well.

But here's where things really get interesting: in May 2019, Sony and Microsoft announced a surprise partnership in which the two companies will share resources to further their own cloud gaming, AI and enterprise products. Does this mean the PS5 will have an improved version of PlayStation Now, or an entirely new cloud platform to compete with Google Stadia? We'll have to wait and see.

PS5 backwards compatibility
Yep! In the Wired interview, Sony confirmed that the PS5 will play PS4 games as well as support the current PlayStation VR headset.

However, the jury's still out on whether the PS5 will play games from older PlayStation generations, as was rumored several months ago.

PS5 games: The titles to expect
While the PS5 has yet to be confirmed, it's never to early to speculate which titles may land on Sony's next gen system. First-party title Ghosts of Tsushima has yet to get a release date, meaning we could see it hit PS4 and PS5 at once. And while we're speculating, don't be shocked to see sequels to PS4 megahits God of War, Horizon: Zero Dawn and Spider-Man on the PS5.

(Image credit: Sony)
We now know that the long awaited The Last of Us: Part II is coming to PS4 on May 29, 2020. And while PS4 games will work on PS5, we wouldn't be surprised to see some sort of enhanced edition for the new console, much like Sony delivered with The Last of Us: Remastered on PS4. 

As far as third-party games, Bethesda already confirmed that its upcoming Starfield game is a "next-generation" experience. We also wouldn't be shocked to see The Elder Scrolls VI and Cyberpunk 2077 land on Sony's next-generation hardware. And since they release like clockwork, expect new Madden, NBA 2K and FIFA titles around the PS5's launch window.

According to our friends at GamesRadar, Ubisoft confirmed in a conference call that upcoming titles such as Watch Dogs Legion, Gods and Monsters and Rainbow Six Quarantine will be optimized for PS5 and Xbox Scarlett.

Wondering what's next for Xbox? Be sure to also check our roundup of the latest Xbox Scarlett rumors.

MORE ABOUT...
Don't wait for Cyber Monday: Nest Thermostat just hit lowest price ever
Killer Ring deal: $100 off Ring Floodlight Camera and Echo Dot bundle
SEE MORE RELATED
LATEST
Sony's 55-inch 4K TV is gorgeous and now it's $300 off in this Cyber Monday deal 
SEE MORE LATEST
Sony PS5 release date and price just leaked
A leak on Twitter says that the PS5 will launch November 20 at a price of $499. But that's not all.
Tom's Guide
The 21 Hottest Gifts Of 2019
ZangDeal
|
Sponsored
The Genius Trick Every Best Buy Shopper Should Know
Wikibuy
|
Sponsored
9 Reasons This Electric Toothbrush is Worth All The Hype
quip
|
Sponsored
Is this the most addictive World War 3 strategy game? Register and play Conflict of Nations now for free!
Conflict Of Nations : World War 3
|
Sponsored
PS5 controller teased by Sony patent
Tom's Guide
This amazing iPhone 11 Pro deal is 50% off at Best Buy now
Tom's Guide
Shut the Front Door! These Luxury Vehicles Cost Under $50k!
Auto Enthusiast | Search Ads
|
Sponsored
MOST POPULAR

The best Cyber Monday deals 2019
By Louis RamirezNovember 30, 2019

READ MORE
Garmin Vivoactive 3 crashes to $129 in early Cyber Monday deal
By Hilda ScottNovember 30, 2019

READ MORE
Holy cow! The iPad is at lowest price ever on Target right now
By Mark SpoonauerNovember 30, 2019

READ MORE
Noise-cancelling for $80?! This Sennheiser headphones deal is epic
By Alex BracettiNovember 30, 2019

READ MORE
Hurry! iPad hits lowest price ever at $229 on Amazon
By Mark SpoonauerNovember 30, 2019

READ MORE
How to Watch Alabama vs. Auburn: Live Stream the Crimson Tide vs. Tigers Iron Bowl
By Philip MichaelsNovember 30, 2019

READ MORE
The best smart lock deal of Cyber Monday is already here
By Henry T. CaseyNovember 30, 2019

READ MORE
Best iPad Cyber Monday deals in 2019
By Henry T. CaseyNovember 30, 2019

READ MORE
Black Friday Apple Watch deals at Best Buy, Walmart and Amazon
By Caitlin McGarryNovember 30, 2019

READ MORE
The best laptop deals for Black Friday weekend 2019
By Louis RamirezNovember 30, 2019

READ MORE
This $69 Blue Yeti Nano microphone is the best Cyber Monday deal for streamers and podcasters
By Michael AndronicoNovember 30, 2019

READ MORE
Best Amazon Cyber Monday deals of 2019
By Louis RamirezNovember 30, 2019

READ MORE
Get the Amazon Echo Show for lowest price ever before Cyber Monday
By Hilda ScottNovember 30, 2019

READ MORE
Advertisement

BE IN THE KNOW
Get instant access to breaking news, the hottest reviews, great deals and helpful tips.


No spam, we promise. You can unsubscribe at any time and we'll never share your details without your permission.
Advertisement

MOST READ
MOST SHARED
1
This $1,349 laptop is a stunningly cheap $499 deal for Black Friday
2
Apple may have found AR glasses’ killer app
3
The best Black Friday iPhone deals right now
4
Ring Fit Adventure review: A bizarre and fun way to sweat with your Switch
5
Best Buy Black Friday 2019: The deals worth your time (and money)
Advertisement

Tom's Guide is part of Future US Inc, an international media group and leading digital publisher. Visit our corporate site.

Terms and conditions
 
Privacy policy
 
Cookies policy
 
Accessibility Statement
 
Advertise
 
About us
 
Contact us
 
Archives
© Future US, Inc. 11 West 42nd Street, 15th Floor, New York, NY 10036.

