

SUBSCRIBE

The Overhead Press
Which muscles
Tips on how
Tips on weights
Benefits
Other moves
Takeaway
Whether you’re working on a weightlifting program or just want to get back mobility, it’s important to keep the muscles in your upper body conditioned.

These muscles help you do everyday tasks, like putting dishes up high in a cabinet or placing items overhead on a shelf.

One way to keep your upper body in shape is by including the overhead press, also called a shoulder press, in your overall exercise routine.

Muscles at work during the overhead press
Standing overhead press
If you choose to do the overhead press from a standing position, you’ll work most of the large muscles in your upper body, including the:

pectorals (chest)
deltoids (shoulders)
triceps (arms)
trapezius (upper back)
Because being upright requires balance, you also recruit the muscles in your core, including your abdominals and lower back.

In an upright position, you compensate for balance changes during each phase of the overhead press and create stability through the spine to ensure a proper foundation for a loaded overhead movement, explains Brent Rader, DPT, physical therapist at The Centers for Advanced Orthopaedics.

In addition to the power from your upper body, your lower body helps assist when you push a weighted bar overhead.

Seated overhead press
If you perform the overhead press in a seated position with your back pressed against the back of a pad, strength and mobility coach Matt Pippin, CSCS says the core activation will go away. The shoulders and triceps will perform all of the work.

How to perform an overhead press
When executing any exercise that involves using weight, you need to understand the function and pattern of the movement before you hit the gym.

Rader explains that an overhead press is simply a movement in which resistance is pushed above the head. You can do this in a variety of ways, like by using:

both hands simultaneously
one hand at a time
a single barbell held by both hands
one free weight in each hand
Check your shoulder mobility
With this in mind, you also need to find out if you have the shoulder mobility, or range of movement, to perform the exercise safely.

To determine this, Pippin suggests performing the following test:

What to do	When to improve range of motion	When overhead press is OK
Keep your entire body still. Slowly lift both arms overhead.	If you can’t easily get your arms in line with your ears, then you shouldn’t do overhead pressing with a barbell, dumbbell, or kettlebells.	If you can get in line with your ears, you have the prerequisite shoulder mobility necessary and can follow the steps below.
Grip and hold
For the standing barbell press, walk up to the bar and grab it slightly wider than shoulder-width apart with palms facing away from your body. Then follow these steps:

Unrack the bar and step back. The bar should be resting in your hands right around your collarbone.
To start the movement, brace your abs, squeeze your butt, tilt your head back, and drive the bar up toward the ceiling.
Once the bar passes your forehead, return your head to neutral while locking your arms out overhead. At the top of the press, make sure your abs and glutes are still engaged and you’re not bending your lower back.
Slowly lower the bar back down to your shoulders, tilting your head back to make room.
Keep your elbows in
Pippin notes to keep your elbows either directly underneath your wrists or slightly more inward.

“This angle will allow for optimal force production. If the elbows flare out to the side, you’re losing leverage from which to push from,” he explains.

Use your abs and glutes, too
Pippin also recommends keeping your glutes and abs engaged throughout the movement.

“This is your pillar of support from which to press. Losing this stability will make the bar shake and reduce the amount of weight that you can push,” he says.


Weights to use for the overhead press
Once you know how to execute the overhead press with correct form, it’s time to determine the type of weight or resistance to use.

“Free weights such as dumbbells allow for different angles to be stimulated compared to a traditional barbell,” Pippin says.

Also, if you have some wrist or shoulder limitations, Pippins says dumbbells can allow for a path of less resistance, allowing you to perform the movement a little more safely.

Additionally, Pippin says that kettlebells, if used upside down or bottom’s up, allow you to train the shoulder in a more stable way with much less load.

“The bottom’s up position creates a giant stability component, as the bell will shake uncontrollably. This is a great training tool for the shoulders and is a great way to introduce overhead pressing while working on building up shoulder mobility,” he explains.

ADVERTISING

inRead invented by Teads

Benefits of the overhead press
There are several benefits of including the overhead press in your workout routine. Overhead pressing can increase:

strength and size of the shoulder muscles
strength and size of the triceps muscles
strength and size of the trapezius muscle
strength in the core muscles, such as your obliques, transverse abdominal muscles, lower back, and spinal stabilizers, when performing the exercise while standing
performance of other exercises, like the bench press
Similar moves to the overhead press
Performing the same exercise repeatedly can lead to boredom, overuse, and a decrease in performance and gains.

So, if you’re looking to train the same muscles required in the overhead press but want to vary your workouts, you might be wondering if there are other exercises you can do. Here are some to consider:

The Turkish get-up is a popular kettlebell or dumbbell exercise that recruits the same musclesTrusted Source as the overhead press.
You can change the grip when using dumbbells to do the overhead press. Rather than your palms facing out, switch to a neutral grip with the hands facing each other, elbows pointed in front of you.
Any type of rowing exercise that works the back and rotator cuff muscles may be a good swap. This can include a seated row machine, bent-over row, barbell row, or dumbbell row.
Pushups work some of the same muscles as the overhead press, including the pectorals, triceps, and shoulders. Plus, since no weights are required, you can do them anywhere, anytime.
Exercises that target the small muscles in your shoulders and upper back, such as scapular retraction and prone lateral raise, can help you decrease injuries and allow you to perform the overhead press more efficiently.
Takeaway
Your upper body and trunk house the muscles of the chest, shoulders, back, arms, and core. Collectively, these muscle groups allow you to perform several tasks, including reaching, rotating, and lifting overhead.

While not as common as reaching in front of your body or turning to the side, lifting or pushing overhead is still a movement we need to be able to execute in many daily activities.

The overhead or shoulder press is one of several exercises you can use to build and maintain shoulder strength.

HEALTHLINE CHALLENGES
Show your spine some love with our free 30 day challenge
Sign up for our wellness newsletter to join our Align Your Spine Challenge. We’ll share daily reminders and stretches to increase body awareness, realign joints and build a stronger core.

Enter your email
Your privacy is important to us

 4 sourcescollapsed





Medically reviewed by Gregory Minnis, DPT, specialty in physical therapy, on April 19, 2019 — Written by Sara Lindberg

related stories
Boost Your Muscle Mass with This Compound Bicep Curl Movement
Incline vs. Flat Bench: What’s Best for Your Chest?
The 7 Most Dreaded Exercises on the Planet ... and Why They're Good for You
3 Ways to Do a Squat Thrust
How Much Weight Should You Be Lifting at the Gym?

Eating Breakfast Can Help You Burn More Carbs When You Work Out

From 20s to 60s, Here’s How 9 Women Got the Abs of Their Dreams

I Challenged Myself to 30 Days of Weighted Squats... Here’s What […]

13 Fatigue-Fighting Hacks to Supercharge Your Mornings
Was this article helpful?
Yes
No

READ THIS NEXT
Boost Your Muscle Mass with This Compound Bicep Curl Movement
Medically reviewed by Daniel Bubnis, MS, NASM-CPT, NASE Level II-CSS
This compound move can help to strengthen your triceps, biceps, and shoulders. Consider adding some resistance by incorporating 1-, 3- or 5-pound…

READ MORE
Incline vs. Flat Bench: What’s Best for Your Chest?
Medically reviewed by Daniel Bubnis, MS, NASM-CPT, NASE Level II-CSS
Looking to take chest day to a new level, but unsure what kind of bench press is best? Get all of your questions answered here.

READ MORE
The 7 Most Dreaded Exercises on the Planet ... and Why They're Good for You
Medically reviewed by Daniel Bubnis, MS, NASM-CPT, NASE Level II-CSS
If there's one exercise no one likes, it's probably burpees. But here's why burpees and other dreaded exercises are actually good for you.

READ MORE
3 Ways to Do a Squat Thrust
Medically reviewed by Daniel Bubnis, MS, NASM-CPT, NASE Level II-CSS
Squat thrusts or burpees are challenging exercises, but if you learn to master them, they can yield results. Learn three different ways to do squat…

READ MORE
How Much Weight Should You Be Lifting at the Gym?
Weight training has its benefits when you know what you're doing. But how do we know? Check out your basic guide to lifting at the gym and some…

READ MORE
How Collagen Can Boost Your Body’s Skin, Muscle, and Gut
Medically reviewed by Cynthia Cobb, DNP, APRN
Collagen is an essential building block for the entire body, from skin to gut, and more. Here's five changes you may see or feel just by taking more…

READ MORE
How to Fall Asleep in 10, 60, or 120 Seconds
Medically reviewed by Deborah Weatherspoon, PhD, RN, CRNA
You can do a lot of prep work to make the perfect sleep environment. But if that doesn't work, here are six other hacks to try.

READ MORE
Do You Live with Anxiety? Here Are 11 Ways to Cope
Medically reviewed by Timothy J. Legg, PhD, PsyD
Identifying your triggers can take some time and self-reflection. In the meantime, there are things you can try to help calm or quiet your anxiety…

READ MORE
I Don’t Like Meditating. Here’s Why I Do It Anyway
Medically reviewed by Timothy J. Legg, PhD, PsyD
If your take on meditation is that it's boring or too "new age," then read this. One man shares how - and why - he learned to meditate even though he…

READ MORE
The Difference Between VLDL and LDL
Medically reviewed by Debra Sullivan, PhD, MSN, RN, CNE, COI
Cholesterol is a fatty substance that's needed to build cells. Low-density lipoproteins (LDL) and very low-density lipoproteins (VLDL) are two types…

READ MORE

 
Get our wellness newsletter
Fitness and nutrition tips, health news, and more.

Enter your email
Your privacy is important to us

About Us
Health Topics
Health News
Contact Us
Advertise With Us
Advertising Policy
Newsletters
Careers
Privacy Policy
Terms Of Use
Find An Online Doctor
© 2005-2019 Healthline Media a Red Ventures Company. All rights reserved. Our website services, content, and products are for informational purposes only. Healthline Media does not provide medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment. See additional information.