
STACKPartner Sites
TRAINING
NUTRITION
GEAR
SPORTS
RESOURCES
LOG IN
JOIN
SEARCH

Home // Training // Strength Training

Mastering the Art of the Overhead Press
 
The Overhead Press is a secret weapon of the exercise world. Although it can be detrimental to your health in some situations, if done properly the Overhead Press goes far in creating shoulder stability and strengthening the pressing muscles.

First, let's go over how to do the Overhead Press correctly.

Overhead Press Form
Step 1: Stand with your feet hip-width apart and hold a barbell with a shoulder-width grip and your forearms vertical. The bar should be at the base of your neck and an inch or two in front of your body.

Overhead Press

Step 2: Keeping your core tight, drive the bar overhead until your arms are straight. Your upper arms should finish next to your ears.

Overhead Press

Step 3: Lower the bar in control to the starting position.

In the video below, you can see the exercise in action and learn how to set up using a rack or stand. If you don't have access to a rack or stand, try cleaning the weight up to your shoulders.



Overhead Press Mistakes


Using a grip that's too narrow

Whether you're using a barbell or dumbbells, it's important to start and finish with the correct grip. A grip that's too narrow on the bar, or a finishing position that's too narrow with dumbbells, can lead to muscle and tendon impingement within the shoulder joint. Long story short: When pressing, be sure to have your hands start and finish directly above your shoulders.

The bar shifts in front of you
Overhead Press
Left - Correct / Right - Incorrect

The Overhead Press can potentially place stress on the spine—especially the lower back, or the lumbar spine. Any pushing or pulling movement done vertically (like a Squat, Deadlift, Clean or Standing Press) requires the bar to travel in the same fashion—namely, vertically. When viewing a lift from the side, you should see the bar traveling in a straight line.

Applying this to the Overhead Press, the arms should be beside the ears—not in front of them—in the finished position. The head travels through the "window" created by the arms. This position loads the weight over the spine correctly so the spine doesn't have to bear any unnecessary force that could cause a back injury.

Arching your lower back
Overhead Press
This is too much arching


The number one mistake on an Overhead Press is arching your lower back. The fix might be as simple as learning to take a deep breath in and tightening your core before each rep. You can also consider using a weight belt as the weight gets heavier.

However, this is often caused by a mobility problem in the shoulders or upper back, which makes it impossible to lift directly overhead without compensating. If that's the case, you'll need to put in extra time to improve your upper-back and shoulder mobility.

Until that's fixed, opt for the Landmine Shoulder Press, which is a great alternative that is safe for the back and shoulders.


Overhead Press Tips
Here are tips to get the most out of every rep of the Overhead Press.

Determine your sticking point
Are you stronger when locking out the weight at the top or off the shoulders? Do you hit the wall at the halfway point? If you're having lockout problems, notice that the triceps play a key role in finishing off the press movement. Especially since the elbows are moving away from the body, working on the long head of the triceps should be added to the program. The best exercise for long-head activation is the French Press.


Do more pulling
If your issues come from the bottom up, they may have more to do with deltoid strength and shoulder stability. Typical bodybuilding shoulder exercises like Lateral Raises and Front Raises are great tools to hit the delts. But when it comes to shoulder stability, believe it or not, shoulder-specific exercises are not the way to go.

The answer is to do more pulling. Shoulder stability issues usually have to do with weakness in the rotator cuff musculature. All four of the rotator cuff muscles originate at the shoulder blade. More pressing only does so much to help those muscles, since their role in pushing movements is to stay stable. Training the upper back through pull movements actually helps make the rotator cuff muscles contract through a full range of motion and get stronger in the process.

Here are my top five pulling exercises for shoulder stability.

Wide-Grip Row
Face Pulls
Inverted Rows
Pull-Ups
Trap 3 Raises
Overhead Press Workout
Now that you know how to perform the exercise properly, here's a sample workout that includes the Overhead Press. This is a challenging workout that will safely build shoulder strength and size.

Perform grouped exercises as a superset (i.e., 3A and 3B), resting for two minutes between sets.

1) Arm Circles - 3x10 each direction

2) Dynamic Pec Stretch - 2x5 each side

3A) Barbell Overhead Press - 4x10

3B) Face Pulls - 4x10

4A) Dumbbell Seated Neutral Grip Shoulder Press - 4x10

4B) Inverted Rows - 4x10

You should notice your pressing efforts become stronger and more stable in later sets due to back activation needed to set your shoulders.

RELATED: 

How the Military Press Benefits Athletes

Are You Making These 3 Shoulder Press Mistakes?

Build Strong Rear Delts With Bent-Over Lateral Raises

 


Topics: SHOULDERS | PULLS | EXERCISE | PRESS | DUMBBELLS | BARBELL | ROTATOR CUFF | RAISES | SPINE | ROTATOR CUFF MUSCLES

Updated: May 01, 2017
Lee BoyceLee Boyce - Lee Boyce is a sought-after strength coach, writer, speaker, and college professor based in Toronto, Ontario. His work is regularly featured in many of the largest publications in the world, and he's a contributor and speaker for the National Strength and Conditioning Association. A former universit
Become a Contributing Expert

BECOME A BETTER ATHLETE
Join STACK and gain instant FREE access to resources that have helped millions of people jump higher, run faster, get stronger, eat smarter and play better.

YOUR EMAIL HERE

MOST POPULAR
How a Unique Speed Training Program Flipped the Fortunes of Indiana Football
How a Unique Speed Training Program Flipped the Fortunes of Indiana Football
Are Reign Energy Drinks Healthy?
Are Reign Energy Drinks Healthy?
4 Exercises to Destroy Your Biggest Deadlift Flaws
4 Exercises to Destroy Your Biggest Deadlift Flaws
Why Kids Need More Bacon and Eggs
Why Kids Need More Bacon and Eggs
The Top Speed Secret: Why Getting Faster Is the Ultimate Performance-Enhancer For Team Sport Athletes
The Top Speed Secret: Why Getting Faster Is the Ultimate Performance-Enhancer For Team Sport Athletes
SEE MORE 


More About Strength Training

2 Keys to a Better Barbell Hip Thrust


Want to Experience the Most Efficient Workout of Your Life? Try This


5 Tips to Combat 'Ego Lifting' and Build Legit Strength


How to Build Serious Single-Leg Strength (And Why It's So Important)


Nordic Hamstring Curls: Why Everyone Should Try This Ultra-Challenging Exercise


6 Ways to Squeeze In an Effective Workout Over Thanksgiving Break


Why Your Grip Strength Is One of the Best Predictors of Your Life Span


7 Advanced Push-Up Variations for a Shredded, Stronger Body


More Cool Stuff You'll Like
Shoulder Workouts for Mass: 3 Tips
Shoulder Workouts for Mass: 3 Tips
Build Healthy Shoulders With 5 Rotator Cuff-Strengthening Exercises
Build Healthy Shoulders With 5 Rotator Cuff-Strengthening Exercises
Keep Your Rotator Cuff Muscles Strong With This Stabilization Circuit
Keep Your Rotator Cuff Muscles Strong With This Stabilization Circuit
5 Rear Delt Exercises for Strong and Durable Shoulders
5 Rear Delt Exercises for Strong and Durable Shoulders
9 Best Kettlebell Exercises for a Powerful Lower Body
9 Best Kettlebell Exercises for a Powerful Lower Body
How to Set Up for Landmine Exercises (And 17 Highly Effective Exercises)
How to Set Up for Landmine Exercises (And 17 Highly Effective Exercises)
How to Improve Your Vertical Jump Without Jumping
How to Improve Your Vertical Jump Without Jumping
Do These Low Box Drills to Develop Quick Foot Speed
Do These Low Box Drills to Develop Quick Foot Speed
Fix the 10 Most Common Deadlift Technique Mistakes
Fix the 10 Most Common Deadlift Technique Mistakes
The 7 Best Slide Board Exercises
The 7 Best Slide Board Exercises
What is a Superset? Everything You Need to Know about the Training Trick that Supercharges Workouts
What is a Superset? Everything You Need to Know about the Training Trick that Supercharges Workouts
Training Aids for Baseball Speed and Agility
Training Aids for Baseball Speed and Agility
More About Strength Training
Basketball Off-Season Workout: Strength and Size
The Perfect Shoulder Workout for Strength and Durability
Why You Should Always Put Safety Collars on the Bar
This Modification Makes Russian Twists Way More Effective (and Safer!)
Get Ripped With Patrick Willis' Workout
More About Shoulders
The Perfect Shoulder Workout for Strength and Durability
This Shoulder Warm-Up Will Prepare You for Intense Training
Dwight Howard's Strength Coach Provides the Best Upper-Body Exercise for Athletes
This Shoulder Press Variation Will Build Strong and Durable Shoulders for Baseball
5 Hacks for Quicker and More Effective Workouts

RELATED CONTENT
How To Do The Turkish Get-Up
The Turkish Get-Up is not just standing up with a weight. Here are the six simple steps to get it done.
7 Exercises That Safely Build Shoulder Strength
Overhead athletes must use caution when working their shoulders. Perform these shoulder exercises to get stronger safely.
How The Military Press Benefits Athletes
STACK Expert Travis Hansen explains the benefits of the Military Press and suggests how to include it in your workouts.
3 Ways You're Messing Up The Romanian Deadlift
Strength coach Lee Boyce explains the benefits of the Romanian Deadlift, identifies three common technique errors and offers tips on how to avoid them.
How To Get Big Arms: The Best 2 Exercises
STACK Expert Lee Boyce teaches you how to get big arms fast with two essential exercises.
Why You Need Strong Triceps
To improve shoulder stability via triceps strength, strengthen the three heads of the muscle. STACK Expert Lee Boyce explains.
STACK Resources

STACK Fitness
STACK Conditioning
Coaches & Trainers
STACK 4W
News
STACK Partners

Fox Sports
YardBarker
Eastbay
Foot Locker
Men's Fitness
Yahoo! Sports
 

Stack Sports
CaptainU
Goalline
Krossover
League Lineup
Pointstreak
 
STACK

About STACK
Contact Us
Terms of Use
Privacy Policy
STACK Experts
Advertising
Contribute
Follow STACK

Facebook
Twitter
YouTube
Instagram
Pinterest
RSS

