 
ARTICLES
FORUMS
BLOGS
VIDEOS
BIOTEST STORE
SEARCH



Stop Lying About Your Overhead Press
Build Real Strength Overhead. Here's How.
by Lee Boyce | 08/04/16
Stop-lying-about-your-overhead-press
Tags: Overhead PressBodybuildingPowerlifting & Strength
Do You Meet The Standard?
Everyone claims to have a strict overhead press that meets the standard of 0.75x bodyweight. That means a 200 pound guy should be able to strictly press 150 pounds over his head. But that standard is almost always perverted when you see just what it takes for the lifter to complete the rep.

It's usually not too pretty. A wide stance and ultra-arch isn't any more a demonstration of strength of the overhead press than raising the hips is to a bench press, or kipping is to a weighted pull-up.

Look, the bar should travel in a straight line from start to finish. Stacking on too much weight and allowing your back to go into extreme, disc-herniating extension is the wrong way. That's one reason the clean and press was removed from Olympic lifting competition.

Coaching Cues for the Overhead Press
The strict press is as much a dance with rhythm and timing as it is a feat of brutal strength. Once you have mastery over the control, tempo, and coordination of your body, you'll be in a good place to get really strong with it.


Start Position: Use a hip-width foot stance, similar to that recommended for a conventional deadlift. Set your hands just outside your shoulder width. The bar should be at collarbone level. Likewise, the elbows should be no more than an inch in front of the bar.
Pressing Phase: Tucking the chin creates the space for the bar to travel straight up, in front of the face, without deviation. It's important not to allow the back to overarch during this first part of the lift. Make it a goal to get the bar to forehead level with your spine perfectly straight.
Lockout Phase: Two things need to happen here. First, the elbows need to flare outwards in order to incorporate the mid and rear deltoids more fully. Don't be afraid to let the arms rotate as the rep progresses. This will allow the forearms to be properly positioned under the bar and contribute to the strength of the lift.
Second, get the spine under the bar as soon as you can. This happens by immediately getting the torso "through the window" you create with your arms.

This should happen the moment the bar crosses the level of your forehead. The sooner you can do this, the better. It's a saving grace for your sticking point. It doesn't mean pressing the bar behind you. It means shifting the ribcage forward. Understand the crucial difference.

Can't Press Heavy With Good Form? Do These Exercises
The true correctives for poor press patterns come in the form of abdominal and thoracic spine health. Paying attention to both factors will lower the amount of low back extension, strengthen the movement, and provide an ideal loaded overhead position. This can be accomplished by doing these exercises:

1 – Ab Wheel Rollout
Ab Wheel Rollout
The tucked hip position and core bracing intrinsic to rollouts are essentially a horizontal version of an overhead press pattern. The second you lose neutrality of the lower spine during this movement, you'll feel it in the form of discomfort in the low back. Get a strong, technically sound rollout and you'll be well on your way to strong pressing.

2 – Kettlebell Angled Press

This movement blazes the lower traps, which are key players in promoting thoracic extension and keeping the ribcage up high. Proper extension can create range of motion at the shoulder joint and a better environment to achieve a proper finish position in the press, with the bar stacked over the spine. (You don't need much weight to do these.)

Use A False Grip (Yeah, I Said It)
Many lifters make the mistake of loading the barbell too deep into the palm during pressing movements. This has a different effect on push exercises than it does on pull exercises. When the bar is nested too far back in the hand, the wrist often breaks and the rep is performed with the bar unsupported by the rest of the arm.

With a conventional grip, it's difficult to correct this positioning and place the bar where it should be, especially as the weight increases. A false grip allows you to clasp the bar and put the weight over the wrist and forearm from the beginning.

If you don't know what a false grip is, it's where you place your thumbs on the same side of the bar as your fingers. In the conventional grip, you wrap your thumbs and fingers around the bar.

False vs. Conventional Grip

The false grip is best reserved for intermediate or advanced lifters as they're strong enough and experienced enough to not drop the bar.

The Benefits of Doing It Right
Guys with a susceptibility to spine injury should really take the strict press seriously, because doing it wrong can make that susceptibility much worse. Conversely, doing it properly can tremendously increase spine health. There's virtually no middle ground.

A Challenge
Gauge your true 2, 3, or 5 rep max for the overhead press, being as strict as possible in following the form guidelines listed above. Even if your numbers regress at first, you'll be rebuilding long-term strength and health.

Related:  Nailing the Overhead Press
Related:  Man Up and Military Press
Lee-boyce
Lee Boyce
Lee Boyce is a highly sought-after strength and sports-performance coach, based in Toronto, Canada.
Follow Lee Boyce on Instagram
COMMENT ON FACEBOOK
08/04/16

Popular & Trending
Big-triceps-no-elbow-pain
NEW
Tip: Big Triceps, No Elbow Pain
by Gareth Sapstead | Today
Build stronger triceps – without all the wear and tear – by using X cables. Try these inflammation-free exercises.

TrainingBigger Stronger Leaner
Want-biceps
Want Big Arms? Stop Wasting Your Time!
by Ellington Darden, PhD | 07/29/08
You've spent 6 months trying to add a quarter inch to your arms. Dr Darden has just one question: “Why take 6 months to do it when you could do the same thing in 2 weeks?” Here's how...

BodybuildingArmsHIT
A-better-way-to-overhead-press
Tip: A Better Way to Overhead Press
by Dr John Rusin | 10/19/16
Many athletes and bodybuilders are dropping the overhead press and replacing it with this safer alternative. Check it out.

Tips
Get-stronger-overhead-3-exercises-you-need
NEW
Tip: Get Stronger Overhead – 3 Exercises You Need
by TJ Kuster | Today
These accessory moves will help you build your barbell overhead press and a whole lot more. Check 'em out.

TrainingBigger Stronger Leaner
The-missing-trap-building-exercises
Tip: The Missing Trap-Building Exercises
by Lee Boyce | 11/07/17
You need more than shrugs for big traps. Add one of these four movements to your list.

TipsTrapsWeightlifting
Beyond_fish_oil_flameout
Beyond Fish Oil
by TC Luoma | 10/28/19
Many fish oil supplements are underdosed and made only for women. Not this one.

Nutrition & SupplementsSuper Health
Action
Action Offends The Inactive
by Chris Shugart | 02/04/14
A funny thing happens when you try to better yourself: other people try to stop you. Here’s why and how to deal with them.

Motivation
Thick-and-wide-the-back-solution
NEW
Thick and Wide: The Back Solution
by Paul Carter | Yesterday
Here's how to get a thick, wide back... and why what you're doing now is probably holding back your gains.

TrainingBigger Stronger Leaner
Bodyweight-only-backside-training
NEW
Tip: Bodyweight-Only Backside Training
by Gareth Sapstead | Yesterday
Build your hamstrings, glutes, and back. No weight plates required. Check out these surprisingly challenging exercises.

TrainingBigger Stronger Leaner
Curcumincaps
Curcumin for Muscle Growth
by Brad Dieter, PhD | 09/19/13
Curcumin is widely known for its anti-inflammatory and pain relieving effects, but it may also be anabolic.

Curcumin
8-reasons-to-marry-a-fit-person
8 Reasons to Marry a Fit Person
by Chris Shugart | 09/03/18
Fit people do it better. Marriage, that is. Here's why.

OpinionMotivation
The-absolute-best-way-to-build-quads
The Absolute Best Way to Build Quads
by T Nation | 03/24/17
It's one of the toughest muscle groups to build. We ask 10 experts for their single best tip for building quads. Check out their answers.

LegsBodybuilding
Hungarian-oak-leg-blast
Hungarian Oak Leg Blast
by Christian Thibaudeau | 01/24/08
We don't have a picture of him in the article. We don't even know his name. But this alleged monster's training program was too compelling to pass up because of a technicality.

Legs
5-3-1-how-to-build-pure-strength
5/3/1: How to Build Pure Strength
by Jim Wendler | 07/07/09
Jim Wendler's 5/3/1/ program promises slow and steady gains that will eventually turn you into the strongest guy in the gym. And it delivers, every time.

Powerlifting & Strength
The-best-biceps-exercises-you're-not-doing
The Best Biceps Exercises You're Not Doing
by Brian McFadden | 07/22/16
If you only do regular curls for your biceps, you're missing a whole lot of muscle. Do these exercises to finally build some bigger guns.

ArmsBodybuilding
This-stuff-is-rocket-fuel-for-the-mind-body
NEW
This Stuff is Rocket Fuel for the Mind & Body
by TC Luoma | Today
Boost mood and motivation. Increase performance. Heighten concentration. Supercharge the mind-muscle connection.

Nutrition & SupplementsWorkout Nutrition
5-things-big-strong-guys-do
5 Things Big Strong Guys Do
by Paul Carter | 06/09/16
Here are five habits of highly effective lifters that you should adopt. Or just keep sucking. It's up to you.

MotivationOpinionBodybuilding
The-best-damn-workout-plan-for-natural-lifters
The Best Damn Workout Plan For Natural Lifters
by Christian Thibaudeau | 07/14/17
Bodybuilding is full of programs used by "enhanced" lifters, but most people don't take drugs and can't get good results. This effective program is for them.

Bodybuilding
Crossfit-and-functional-training
CrossFit and Functional Training
by Mark Rippetoe | 11/03/14
Heavy barbell training is the best way to build strength. And everything about sports performance gets better when you're stronger.

CrossFitPowerlifting & Strength
One-steroid-cycle-the-muscle-memory-effect
Tip: One Steroid Cycle – The Muscle Memory Effect
by TC Luoma | 05/25/19
We finally understand the amazing truth about muscle memory, and it's good news for steroid users and even natties.

TipsBodybuilding
The-game-changers-exposed
The Game Changers – Exposed
by Christian Thibaudeau | 11/19/19
Do the documentaries popularizing veganism hold up? Not this one. Here's what you really need to know.

Nutrition & SupplementsFeeding the Ideal Body
Better-butts-and-bigger-legs
Tip: Better Butts and Bigger Legs
by Gareth Sapstead | 11/27/19
Lower-body day just got more interesting. Here are two ways to make this move even more effective.

TrainingBigger Stronger Leaner
Lead-143
Screw Cardio! Four Complexes for a Shredded Physique
by Chris Shugart | 08/26/09
Get ripped fast with 9-minute workouts! Too bad most "fit" people will likely throw up on minute 8.

Fat Loss Training
The-5-jackasses-of-fitness
The 5 Jackasses of Fitness
by Dan John | 11/06/14
Let's improve the fields of fitness and strength training. How? By calling out these five types of jackwagons.

OpinionMotivation
Push-pull-legs-split
Push-Pull-Legs: The Ultimate Split
by Paul Carter | 08/17/18
Training one body part per day is outdated, and full-body workouts don't always cut it. Push-pull-legs is superior for any goal. Here's why.

BodybuildingPowerlifting & Strength
Testosterone Dangerously Hardcore sice 1998

Get The Weekly Dose Newsletter
It's Free!

Expert Insights To Get Stronger, Gain Muscle Faster, And Take Your Lifting To The Next Level

Name
 
Email


T-MAG T-MAG.COM TMUSCLE
© 2019 T Nation LLC. All Rights Reserved.
Privacy Policy
Cookie Policy
Affiliate Links Policy
Terms of Use
Home
Articles
Forums
Blogs
Videos
Biotest Store
Feedback
Editorial Guidelines
Article Submission
Advertising on T Nation
Testosterone Nation
Share to Facebook
, Number of shares137
Share to Twitter
Share to Email
More AddThis Share options
, Number of shares21
