MENU
Verywell Fit
Search
Search
Verywell Health
Verywell Mind
Verywell Family


STRENGTH  STRENGTH TRAINING
PRINT 
How to Do the Dumbbell Overhead Press
Proper Form, Variations, and Common Mistakes
By Paul Rogers
Updated November 02, 2019
Strength Training Tips and Workouts
More in Strength
 Strength Training
Beginners
Techniques and Strategies
Injury Prevention
Reducing Fat
Total Body Workouts
Programs for Sports
Abs
In This Article
Benefits
Step-by-Step Instructions
Common Mistakes
Modifications and Variations
Safety and Precautions
Try It Out

BACK TO TOP
Targets: Shoulders


Equipment Needed: Dumbbells

Level: Beginner

The dumbbell overhead press increases strength throughout the shoulders and engages the core for stability.1﻿ It can be done in either a sitting or standing position, and with dumbbells held horizontally at the shoulders or rotated in a hammer grip. A sitting position helps stabilize the back, while a standing position works a wider range of muscles. Beginners should pick a light weight to start, increasing it until you find a weight that you can lift with good form for 10 repetitions but feel fatigued at the final rep. Women might start with 5-pound dumbbells and men with 10-pound dumbbells. You can use this exercise in any upper body strength workout.

Benefits
This exercise works all aspects of the deltoid muscle of the shoulder. While you can do an overhead press with an exercise machine or barbell, dumbbells offer some unique benefits. In using a dumbbell you have more activation of the anterior (front) deltoid than when using a barbell.

You can also identify whether you have an imbalance in your shoulder strength. When performing it standing you will be challenging your core muscles to stabilize you during the press.2﻿ In daily life, you may need to place objects on shelves above your head (or your luggage in the overhead compartment on a plane) and this exercise will build strength to do it safely.

Step-by-Step Instructions
A Dumbbell overhead press
Verywell / Ben Goldstein
Stand upright and keep the back straight.
Hold a dumbbell in each hand at the shoulders with an overhand grip. Thumbs should be on the inside and knuckles facing up.
Raise the weights above the head in a controlled motion while exhaling. Pause at the top of the motion.
Return the dumbbells to the shoulders while inhaling.
Repeat for eight to 12 repetitions as desired.
Option: Alternate arms, pressing up with one and then the other, instead of both arms at once.


A Dumbbell overhead press
Verywell / Ben Goldstein
Common Mistakes
To get the most out of this exercise, avoid these errors.


Flared Elbows
Don't point your elbows straight out from your sides as this will put stress on your rotator cuff muscles.

Locked Elbows
Locking your elbows when you reach the top of your lift will transfer tension from your deltoids to your triceps, which aren't the target.

Shoulder Position
For added stability, keep the shoulder blades down and back during the press.

Pressing Too Fast
Don't push up explosively. Press slowly and smoothly. Control the motion of the weights, and don't allow them to stray too far forward or back during the push. Try to keep them slotted in a path above the head.

Arching Back
For safety, keep your back straight at all times and avoid arching your lower back too much while raising the dumbbells overhead.3﻿ Excessive arching in the lower back can be a sign that your weight is too heavy. Shift to a lighter weight to practice holding your back in a safe position and build up to the greater weight.

Lowering Dumbbells Too Far
During the exercise, lower the dumbbells only to your shoulders before pressing again. If you lower them more you increase the risk of straining your shoulders.

Modifications and Variations
Variations of the overhead press will have different effects on the muscles.

Need a Modification?
Seated dumbbell
Inti St Clair/Blend Images/Getty Images
While the standing overhead press is a classic move, you can perform an almost identical move while seated. A seated dumbbell overhead press is a better option for individuals who are getting started in strength training or for people with back issues or injuries. To do the exercise, simply sit on a bench (one with a back support is preferable) and follow the same steps.

Up for a Challenge?
Changing how you do this exercise will challenge different aspects of your shoulder muscles. This exercise can be done sitting, standing, with alternating arms, or with a hammer grip in which the palms are turned in toward your face. Using a barbell is an additional option.

Safety and Precautions
If you have a shoulder, neck, or back injury, talk to your doctor or physical therapist to find out whether this exercise is appropriate. It is possible to injure your shoulders when doing this exercise, especially if you are using heavy weights or poor technique. If you feel any pain during the exercise, slowly lower the weights and end the exercise. Only use a weight you can press with good form for 10 repetitions.

Try It Out
Incorporate this move and similar ones into one of these popular workouts:

Basic full body home workout with dumbbells
Shoulder strength and flexibility workout
Squat, curl, and press workout
How to Do a Dumbbell Shoulder Squat
Was this page helpful?

Article Sources
Related Articles
Try a Dumbbell Shoulder Squat to Build Butt Strength
Push press gif
Perfect Push Press Technique and Tips
Upright Row
Learn How to Work Your Shoulders and Upper Back With the Upright Row
Upright row
20 Great Exercises to Work Your Shoulders
Group of people doing clean and press
Add Power to Your Workout With the Clean and Press
Work Back and Shoulder Muscles With the Dumbbell Bent Over Row
This classic is still effective
7 Days of 7-Minute Workouts
Power Clean
Why CrossFitters Use Power Clean
Woman doing variation of side plank
12 Time-Efficient Exercises You're Not Doing (But Should)
Squat thruster
Lower Body and Core Strength Workout
Serious man training upper body using fly machine
The Right and Wrong Way to Use a Chest Fly Machine
Young woman lifting weight
How to Improve Strength and Speed Through Weight Training
Dumbbell Lunge
Work Your Glutes and Thighs With the Dumbbell Lunge
How to Perform the Reverse Fly
Chest press machine
How to Get the Most Out of a Seated Chest Press
Overhead Squat
Strengthen Your Entire Body With the Overhead Squat Exercise
Verywell Fit
Daily Healthy Eating Tips to Your Inbox
Enter your email
SIGN UP
Follow Us
Facebook
Pinterest
Instagram
Flipboard
Fitness
Healthy Eating
Weight Loss
Editorial Policy
About Us
Privacy Policy
Advertise
Cookie Policy
Careers
Terms of Use
Contact
Visit our other Verywell sites:
Verywell Health
Verywell Mind
Verywell Family
Ⓒ 2019 About, Inc. (Dotdash) — All rights reserved
Verywell is part of the Dotdash publishing family:
The Balance 
Lifewire 
Trip Savvy 
The Spruce
and more
