
Overhead press
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigationJump to search
The press, overhead press (abbreviated OHP) or shoulder press is a weight training exercise with many variations, typically performed while standing, in which a weight is pressed straight upwards from racking position until the arms are locked out overhead, while the legs, lower back and abs maintain balance.[1] The exercise helps build muscular shoulders with bigger arms, and is one of the most difficult compound upper-body exercises.[2]


Contents
1	Movement
2	Equipment
3	Variations
4	Biomechanics (Military press)
5	See also
6	References
7	Further reading
Movement

The overhead press is set up by taking a barbell or other weight and putting it in racking position. This can be done by taking the weight from a rack or by cleaning the weight from the floor (clean and press). The weight is then pressed to overhead until the elbows are fully locked out.[3] As the weight clears the head, the lifter leans forward slightly, or comes directly under, in order to keep balance. As the weight is lowered back to racking position and clears the head again, the lifter leans slightly back. The overhead press is a highly effective compound full-body exercise.

The exercise can be done sitting or standing, with alternating arms or with a hammer grip in which the palms face each other. Performing it standing recruits many more muscle groups in order to maintain balance and support the lift[4], rather than performing it seated. Like the squat and deadlift, it can be thought of as a whole-body exercise, to some extent.[citation needed]

Equipment
The overhead press can be performed with any type of weight/equipment, but is commonly performed with:

Barbell
Dumbbell
Kettlebell[5]
Out of those, the dumbbell and kettlebell provide unilateral qualities, and out of those, the kettlebell provides the most variety due to the grip attributes of the kettlebell. It provides a different way to get the most benefit out of the exercise.[6] Over 50+ press variations can be created through changing of:[citation needed]

Grip
Angle
Stance
Etc.
Variations
Other variations of the overhead press are:

Arnold press: beginning a dumbbell press with forearms supinated, ending with forearms pronated. Named after Arnold Schwarzenegger. The Arnold Press in essence greatly increases the [Larry] Scott Press's range of motion by starting in a position close to the dumbbell curls' finishing position instead of the Scott Press's starting position of elbows pulled back and at or above the shoulder.[7]
Behind-the-neck press: barbell on the trapezius vs. on the anterior deltoids. This variation presents risks to those lacking in shoulder mobility. Care should be taken to ensure adequate shoulder range of motion exists prior to undertaking this variation.[8]
Bradford press: as you press, once the bar clears a few inches overhead it is slowly lowered behind the head then explosively reversed to the front and slowly lowered to the starting position. The 2 phases are commonly considered one repetition. Named after Jim Bradford.[citation needed]
Dumbbell press: using dumbbells.[citation needed]
Military press: Heels together with strict form with no pre-movement momentum. It is called the "Military Press" because this movement used to be the general indicator or test of one's strength in the military. The military press targets the deltoid muscles in the shoulders as well as the triceps. Additionally, it works the core and legs, which the lifter uses to help stabilize the weight.[citation needed]
Olympic press (clean and press): lift used in Olympic Weightlifting, consists of a clean, then pressing with no lower body movement, such as in the Push press. Discontinued after 1972 Olympics due to inconsistent judging criteria (such as should the lifter be allowed to bend backwards slightly when pressing, should a leg drive be allowed).[citation needed]
One-handed press: pressing with one arm at a time.[citation needed]
Push press: using leg drive to press the weight up[citation needed]
Seated press: pressing while seated (commonly on a bench). The seated press can be performed using a Smith machine, but this is often considered inferior to the free-weight variant because of the lack of recruitment of auxiliary muscles and limited range of movement.[citation needed]
Sots press: pressing to overhead from a deep squat position. Created by Viktor Sots.
Biomechanics (Military press)
The deltoid muscle has a dynamic activation of about 90–120 degrees of abduction. Afterwards it has an almost static function during the remainder of the lift. The rest of the movement is mainly due to contraction of trapezius muscle pars acendens, serratus anterior muscle and trapezius pars descendens. They work together to tilt the scapula to a position that makes the glenoid cavity point superiorly, enabling the last degrees of abduction of the shoulder.[citation needed]

Other contributing muscles include the supraspinatus muscle and biceps brachii muscle caput longum. The rotator cuff is also active to pull the caput humeri into the glenoid cavity and counteract the superior forces of caput humeri created by the deltoid. The triceps contribute to the extension of the elbow, and counteract the force from biceps caput longum.[citation needed]

See also
Bench press
Clean and press
Dip
Handstand pushup
Press up
Push press
References
 "How to Perform Overhead Press – Proper Technique & Form". 2013-04-15. Retrieved 2014-02-18.
 Rippetoe, Mark (2011). Starting Strength: Basic Barbell Training. The Aasgaard Company. pp. 81–88. ISBN 978-0982522738.
 "How To Overhead Press: A Beginner's Guide". Bodybuilding.com. 2015-08-12. Retrieved 2018-09-11.
 "Two Tips to Increase Your Lifts: Overhead Press". Men's Journal. 2012-06-08. Retrieved 2018-09-11.
 "Kettlebell Press Variations". www.living.fit. Retrieved 2018-09-11.
 "Kettlebell Foundations:  Overhead Press". Kettlebell Kings. Retrieved 2018-09-11.
 "The Overhead Press: A Definitive Guide". StudentsFitness.com. 2019-05-13. Retrieved 2019-06-14.
 McKean, Mark R.; Burkett, Brendan J. (2015). "Overhead shoulder press – In-front of the head or behind the head?". Journal of Sport and Health Science. 4 (3): 250–257. doi:10.1016/j.jshs.2013.11.007.
Further reading
Rippetoe, Mark; Kilgore, Lon (2007). Starting Strength: Basic Barbell Training. ISBN 978-0-9768054-2-7.
Kapandji, Ibrahim Adalbert (2007). The Physiology of the Joints: The upper limb. ISBN 978-0-443-10350-6.
vte
Strength-training exercises
Pectorals (chest)	
Bench press (c)Chest fly (i)Dips (c)Machine fly (i)Push-up (c)
Lats and trapezius (upper back)	
Bent-over row (c)Chin-up (c)Pulldown (c)Pullup (c)Muscle-up (c)Seated row (c)Shoulder shrug (i)Supine row (c)
Deltoids (shoulders)	
Front raise (i)Head stand into handstand push-up (c)Lateral raise (i)Military press (c)Rear delt raise (i)Shoulder press (c)Upright row (c)
Biceps (front of arms)	
Biceps curl (i)Chin-up (c)Reverse grip Push-up (c)
Triceps (back of arms)	
Close-grip bench press (c)Dip (c)Pushdown (i)Triceps extension (i)Close grip Push-up (c)
Forearms	
Wrist curl (i)
Abdomen and obliques (abdomen)	
Crunch (i)Leg raise (c)Russian twist (c)Sit-up (c)Squat (c)
Lower back	
Bridge (c)Deadlift (c)Good-morning (c)Hyperextension (c)Pelvic lift (c)
Hips and buttocks	
Bridge (c)Deadlift (c)Dirty dog exercise (c)Squat (c)Leg press (c)Lunge (c)
Quadriceps (front of thighs)	
Bridge (c)Deadlift (c)Leg extension (i)Leg press (c)Lunge (c)Squat (c)
Hamstrings (back of thighs)	
Bridge (c)Deadlift (c)Good-morning (c)Leg curl (i)Squat (c)Leg press (c)Lunge (c)
Adductors (inside of thighs)	
Side-lying leg raise (i)
Calves	
Calf raise (i)
See also BodybuildingBodyweight exerciseCalisthenicsWeightliftingPlyometricsWeight training (List of exercises)Gym
Legend (c) - compound exercise, (i) - isolated exercise
Categories: Weight training exercises
Navigation menu
Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog inArticleTalkReadEditView historySearch
Search Wikipedia
Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article
Donate to Wikipedia
Wikipedia store
Interaction
Help
About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact page
Tools
What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Permanent link
Page information
Wikidata item
Cite this page
Print/export
Create a book
Download as PDF
Printable version

Languages
العربية
Deutsch
Français
Italiano
日本語
Português
Svenska
3 more
Edit links
This page was last edited on 12 November 2019, at 22:08 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaDevelopersStatisticsCookie statementMobile viewWikimedia FoundationPowered by MediaWiki
