
Uberchord App
HOMEBLOGTEAMCHORD FINDERSUPPORT

10 Tips To Learn How to Play the Guitar with Good Technique
February 3, 2017 / Tagged: BEGINNER LESSONS, GUITAR LESSONS /Author: GRAEME HAGUE
how-to-play-the-guitar
Learn How to Play the Guitar with Good Technique From the Start
10-tips-technique-how-to-play-the-guitar
Click for free download
I taught myself how to play the guitar and I’ll admit this resulted in learning some very bad habits that are proving difficult to shake off. I didn’t have awesome apps like Uberchord (click for free download) to guide me. The common problem with novice guitar players is impatience — those how-to books and websites insist that you to take things slowly, focus on the basics and get things right from the start, whereas you want to begin shredding solos and be leaping from a stack of Marshalls with every power chord within… oh, a few weeks would be nice.

If you watch any of the best players in the world, regardless of whether they play classical tunes or heavy rock, they all have one thing in common — good technique, meaning they’re properly applying all those basic requirements for playing great guitar. Have a look at someone like John Petrucci (Dream Theater). Sure, on first impressions he’s going to frighten the hell out of your grandmother, but check out his left hand as he performs. Those blistering solos and chord progressions are achieved with what seems effortless ease and minimal movement, all because Petrucci mastered how to play the guitar with good technique from the start. Good technique, in the final analysis, is the proven best and most proficient way to play, putting your hands and fingers in the right place at the right time.

Here are my best 10 tips for learning how to play the guitar with good technique. Some of them are kind of obvious, while others are the result of long experience. I hope they help. By the way, let’s assume you’re right-handed player. Lefties can make the obvious adjustment.


1. Avoid The Left-Hand Death Grip
When you first start playing, straight away you’ll discover that pressing the strings against the fret boardhow-to-play-the-guitar is hard work, hurts your fingers and makes your wrist ache. The natural way to combat this is by hooking your thumb over the top of the fret board to get leverage, which inadvertently causes you to press the strings more with the flat pad of your finger (where your fingerprint is) rather than the actual fingertip.
how-to-play-the-guitarThis is sometimes called the “death grip”, because you do end up with a fairly fierce grip on your neck and it restricts the reach of your fingers. The proper technique is to have your thumb on the back of the guitar’s neck. This forces your hand to use the fingertips, which is far better and more accurate when it comes to playing just the notes you want without accidentally muting adjacent strings. The trouble is — it feels kind of weird and difficult at first, and your wrist will lack strength. Stick with it and you’ll appreciate the benefits further down the track. Remember, thumb on the back of the neck.

2. Rehearse Standing Up And Sitting Down
how-to-play-the-guitarhow-to-play-the-guitarOkay, things are hard enough as it is without expecting you to waltz around the room while you’re playing. The important thing is, if you’re going to take this dream all the way, one day you’ll be standing up in front of crowd. Playing with your guitar slung across your shoulder is a very different posture to sitting down.

On a chair, you tend to hunch over and try to see what your hands are doing (another bad habit you want to avoid). Then, when you’re standing up, everything changes. Try it and you’ll see what I mean. You’ll find it much harder to see your left hand, for a start. Make sure you have a good guitar strap, adjust it to a comfortable length (forget slinging it down around your knees — looks cool, but it’s a crap playing position) and regularly practice playing while you’re standing up.

3. No Need For Speed
10-tips-technique-how-to-play-the-guitarDon’t ever bother trying to learn how to play fast. Really, don’t do it. Good technique is about accurate fingering and hitting the right notes every time, especially when it comes to scales and playing tricky bar chords. Concentrate on precise fingering. The truth is, learn to play properly and speed will happen all by itself. The biggest obstacle to fast playing is poor technique. Learn good technique and fast fingering will be a chucked-in-for-free bonus. Always take your time and play slowly. Use Uberchord Guitar App, it is a free app that listens to you while you practice the guitar and corrects when you play wrong.

4. Always Use Correct Fingering
how-to-play-the-guitar
Click to Enlarge
Over the centuries of guitar playing the experts have long figured out the best way to play certain chords and scales, meaning which fingers should be playing certain notes on the fret board.

Occasionally, you might discover an easier way of playing these — you’re a musical genius and never knew it. Don’t be tempted. Correct fingering isn’t just about playing that chord or scale properly. Adding variations is considered too, such as sevenths and ninths, and your custom style of fingering a chord might prove that those variations can’t be played (yep, this is one of the things I learned the hard way). Pay careful attention to the correct fingering of a chord and your hand’s position on the fret board for scales. Uberchord will show you exactly how to do it.

5. Silent Rehearsing
how-to-play-the-guitarYou want to watch your favourite TV show when you’re supposed to be rehearsing? Don’t panic, a lot can be achieved by holding your guitar and constantly swapping from one chord to another or playing scales without plucking the strings with your right hand. What you’re doing is still training your left hand to play — it’s all solid practice. Good technique is locked-in habits when you’re playing. With your thumb on the back of the neck, remember?

6. Use A Metronome!
how-to-play-the-guitarPlaying to a click track is really hard at first, but the advantages later on are immeasurable. Your sense of rhythm and timing will get an early boost, if you try using a metronome soon in your career. However, don’t stress about it too much and make sure you set the beats-per-minute (BPM) to something very slow. The idea is to get used to playing in time and at a steady tempo, but don’t rush this at the expense of learning technique. By the way, you’ll find heaps of metronome apps on the internet. And, here are 5 ways you can use a metronome to improve your guitar playing.

7. Don’t Shy Away From Difficult Chords
how-to-play-the-guitarA few weeks ago in my studio, I was recording a friend called Mary, a singer-guitarist, who would move heaven and earth to avoid playing a B minor chord. She found the fingering too difficult and used capos and all manner of transpositions to dodge the dreaded bar chord. If anything, you should seek out these difficult bits and spend more time and energy on perfecting tricky chords, otherwise, you’ll find them a mental barrier to your playing for the rest of your days.

8. Be Disciplined With Your Practice
how-to-play-the-guitar

Nothing beats regularly putting your hands on the guitar and practicing the latest lessons. Even if it’s just for ten minutes on a day when you’re otherwise too busy. Good technique comes from your mind and your fingers remembering how it’s all supposed to work, particularly when it comes to those tricky fingerings. Try to set aside some time every day and develop good playing habits. It’ll also help to build up those calluses on your fingertips.

With the latest version of the Uberchord App you can create your profile and set daily or weekly goals. It tracks your progress and sends you reminders, if you are becoming lazy and losing focus.

9. Give Yourself A Break and Listen to Music
10-tips-technique-how-to-play-the-guitarThe other side of the equation is not to push yourself too hard in the beginning. When your muscles start to creak and the fingertips are stinging, take a break and relax for a while. You can easily strain something and do damage to tendons and ligaments if you ignore the danger signs that you need a rest.

10. Don’t Forget Your Right Hand Practice
10-tips-technique-how-to-play-the-guitarSometimes it’s good to simply mute the strings with your left hand and practise creating a percussive rhythm with your right-hand strumming. Uberchord app also features a strummer trainer to improve your rhythm and timings.

Alternatively, choose an easy chord (or no chord at all) and focus for a while on any finger-picking and plectrum style that you’re learning. The point is that your right-hand technique is often ignored in the effort to get those fingers on your left hand doing the correct thing. Don’t forget that learning how to play the guitar is a two-handed deal.

There you have it. Like I said earlier, a lot of these tips are obvious and common sense, but many new players still make simple mistakes in their enthusiasm to begin playing exciting stuff. Get the basics right, the proper technique happening from the very beginning when learning how to play the guitar, and you can be a great player rather than just a good one.

Guitar Tricks Free Trial
NEWSLETTER
Email Address
Related Posts

Mmm Mmm Mmm Mmm by Crash Test Dummies | Lyrics with Guitar Chords

B Chord on Guitar: History, Chord Shapes, Major Scale & Songs in the Key of B

Rock You Like A Hurricane by Scorpions | Lyrics with Guitar Chords
Comments (27)

Jerry Lake May 4, 2015 at 22:43
Good advise, a lot of the time I find myself getting frustrated and wanting to learn and move along faster. Well like anything else practice makes perfect, and there are no short cuts. And anything worth doing is worth doing right.

REPLY TO JERRY LAKE

Len May 5, 2015 at 16:54
Very Helpful … Thanks …!

REPLY TO LEN

pangky June 6, 2016 at 16:53
Thanks man. Now I want to practice

REPLY TO PANGKY

Thomas Wekey June 9, 2016 at 12:12
Wow. This was very helpful. I’m buying my second guitar, and all the buying guides I found out there were for beginners. This was the only site that has been helpful to me.

REPLY TO THOMAS WEKEY

Guitar Sound Guru July 8, 2016 at 14:39
Great blog for the beginners. Great tips!

REPLY TO GUITAR SOUND GURU

Martin July 22, 2016 at 15:45
Great tips. Very helpful for beginners when start playing guitar.

REPLY TO MARTIN

Raj July 25, 2016 at 09:44
Bro who are u? u are incredible! First i was little confused about death grip but when i place my thumb in the back of its neck the tune became clear also i close my eyes and then practise my speed also increase.
Thanks to u..
Great guy..

REPLY TO RAJ

Austin September 17, 2016 at 03:19
A little while ago my friends asked me if i wanted to join a band of theirs, because they know i was into guitar. But what they didnt know is that I only knew five chords. Hopefully these tips can help me learn faster so i can join before they replace me. The deadline’s catching up fast….

REPLY TO AUSTIN

Eckart Burgwedel September 17, 2016 at 15:53
Austin
Hey Austin,

Have you tried our app Uberchord? It’s interactive and teaches you any chord you want in no-time. If you have an iPhone 5 and up or an iPod 6G, give it a shot, it’s free: https://itunes.apple.com/us/app/id952669753

REPLY TO ECKART BURGWEDEL

Elsa Anderson November 16, 2016 at 20:26
Both my husband and I are trying to pick up the guitar, but neither of us have any musical talent. We are looking to take lessons so that we are taught the correct way to play instead of trying to teach ourselves. That’s why I like your tip about always using the correct fingering because I bet it’s easy to make up your own way of fingering, but it’s not the correct way. http://www.guitarbygeorge.com/

REPLY TO ELSA ANDERSON

peter mullen January 1, 2017 at 20:19
How do you play to a metronome?? I dont get it really…

REPLY TO PETER MULLEN

Dom January 19, 2017 at 14:00
Finally decided to take the leap and try the electric side of things. Giving it a try and renting this guitar (fatlama.com/item/aria-pro-2-fullerton-guitar-near-mint-88084466) for my first proper live gig. Any tips with the electric vs accoustic. I usually play acoustic pop with my Fender, how much of a change is this going to be. Wanted to get used to it before buying.

REPLY TO DOM

aubrey March 20, 2017 at 15:32
these tips are really helpful with learning guitar

REPLY TO AUBREY

Everett April 24, 2017 at 22:49
Here’s a tip… if you say ‘fret hand’ and ‘strum hand’ it would apply to left-handers such as myself as well as right-handers. Yes, I know there are more of you but everyone knows which hand they use for fret vs strum. Using these terms makes all guitar related advice universal.

REPLY TO EVERETT

Taylor Hicken May 3, 2017 at 01:05
I’m not of of those people that is able to learn how to play an instrument fast, I am indeed very slow. On the other hand, my son is pretty good at learning how to play new instruments. He’s been dying to know how to play the guitar, so I’ll have to find a professional to teach him a few lessons.

REPLY TO TAYLOR HICKEN

guitaristnevin May 14, 2017 at 21:10
Thanks a lot! As a beginner guitarist, I am very much thankful for your blog post. I also should mention to other new guitarist that, I have read some other awesome blog about guitar tips for the beginner. And I am sure you will love to read joe’s blog here at https://www.guitarreviewed.com/

REPLY TO GUITARISTNEVIN

Despacito May 18, 2017 at 14:35
Thanks a lot for the tips! I am learning to play guitar and this tips will definitely help me!

REPLY TO DESPACITO

Krystle Carden November 1, 2017 at 19:10
I was curious if you ever considered changing the layout of your site?Its very well written; I love what youve got to say. But maybe you could a little more in the way of content so people could connect with itbetter. Youve got an awful lot of text for only having 1 or two pictures.Maybe you could space it out better?

REPLY TO KRYSTLE CARDEN

Totally Guitars November 1, 2017 at 20:36
Great tips. Always love learning more concerning guitar related stuff everyday.

REPLY TO TOTALLY GUITARS

Johnny November 4, 2017 at 17:16
The point about slowing down and being mindful of your speed is spot on. This is an often overlooked necessary skill every guitar needs. I’ve been playing for 4 months now and find these online articles uber helpful. For all you other guys I found this on Facebook and found it helpful: https://yourguitarbrain.com/4-steps-improve-your-guitar-playing/

Happy strumming dudes!

REPLY TO JOHNNY

Justin Levitt November 27, 2017 at 20:13
Great Article! I love to refer my beginner guitar students to this piece as it reinforces good technique all round from the get go. Although they can be quite pricy, I also recomend my students get a guitar stool so that they can set it up in a way that will achieve good posture when playing. From good posture will come the ability to play and practice for much longer and under a lot less physical stress.

Rock on!

Justin
http://guitarpickzone.com/best-guitar-stool/

REPLY TO JUSTIN LEVITT

Steve May 17, 2019 at 13:20
For tip #1, I have an important tidbit to add.
The steering does not need to touch the fretboard, only the fret. There is no need to push down hard enough for the string to hit to the wood, the metal fret is what makes the note. Also, your finger should be just behind the fret for the cleanest sounding note

REPLY TO STEVE

Devshree Gulhane May 23, 2019 at 10:00
GREAT CONTENT.HERE IS A HUMBLE REQUEST.
KINDLY CREATE THE APP UBERCHORD FOR ANDROID TOO.

REPLY TO DEVSHREE GULHANE

Markus Prosper June 9, 2019 at 20:17
Thanks a lot.Really helpful

REPLY TO MARKUS PROSPER

Cristina June 28, 2019 at 15:23
Every beginner guitar learner should make a mistake to hold a guitar in a proper way like chords position, armrest position, etc. and this article helps a lot for me Read More

REPLY TO CRISTINA

Alex July 24, 2019 at 16:30
Thank you, Graeme! It stands as a very helpful list of tips for me to quickly recollect the main principles of playing guitar which are so often forgotten. We all tend to sit back and play something that doesn’t make us uncomfortable while the only way to have progress is to stick to discipline and rules that you decribed in your article, and to play regularly! It’s better to play 1 hour per day 6 days a week than playing 4 hours per day 2 days a week.

Also I have recently written a new article about choosing a guitar amp for Stratocaster, if you don’t mind I will share it here: https://guitar-amp.com/stratocaster/

REPLY TO ALEX
LEAVE A COMMENT
  
NEWSLETTER
Email Address
HOMEBLOGTEAMCHORD FINDER – LEARN GUITARHOW CAN WE HELP?IMPRINTPRESSPRIVACY POLICY
Copyright © 2019 Uberchord Engineering
Uberchord - logo circle
WP DSGVO Tools (GDPR) for Wordpress and WooCommerceWe are using cookies (like everybody else) to give you the best experience. OK Read privacy policy